not just why are they using a substance
or why they are obsessive pornography or
gambling but what is that doing for them
what is that giving them that they need
what peace of mind what temporary relief
I think a lot about what my North Star
is what I want in my own life what sort
of my ideal life looks like and then
when I'm working with other people and
trying to help them I think about you
know what what is the North Star that
somebody's really in trouble I would
advise hey adopt this as your North Star
do you have something like that that you
think that people
ought to strive for for their own sake
the reason I
smirk when you ask that question is
because
um
it puts me in a position of some kind of
expert
um
whereas believe me
every day
I still work at figuring myself out and
finding my direction and and or or
refining my direction and so on so
it's not like I can say here's this
pearl of wisdom take it and run with it
then this will you know just not like
that for me
um
well let me turn the question on just
for a moment and and as a way for me to
think about your question sure
um so
like I don't know a lot about you you
know but
but I do understand is that in
significant ways
you've made a tremendous success in your
life
a lot of you know achieve things that a
lot of people look at my God if I only
had that
I'd be okay
but let me just ask you this I'm just
absolutely curious
having achieved all that in the material
world
did you come to saying to yourself oh
I'm okay now
the quest is over definitely not so what
so so what were you looking for
so my North Star in the beginning was
wealth and that was I showed up every
day trying to get rich
and at about eight years into that I was
absolutely devastated spiritually is
probably the right way to think about it
I just felt dead inside and I at that
point I was worth about two million
dollars on paper so my actual life was
not the life of a wealthy person but
um I had equity in a company and I went
to my wife and I said hey I know that I
promised I would make you rich one day
I'm gonna need to take a step back for a
minute because I am profoundly unhappy
yeah and she was like hey what I want
for is your happiness and so do whatever
you need to and so we were going to move
to a tiny village in Greece and I was
going to go back to writing which was my
first love okay and just do things that
made me feel alive
long story short
um my then business partner said hey
don't leave
um we actually feel the same way so why
don't we build something that would give
us what we're looking for and so if I
had to shorthand what I came to realize
I'm looking for which is very much my
North Star is fulfillment and I'll
Define fulfillment as working really
hard to build a set of skills that I
care about that serve not only me but
other people
and in doing that I am addressing what I
think are the physics of Being Human now
I may be misunderstanding that it is the
physics only of humans in this era I'm
very open to this is within the context
of the civilization that I grew up in
here are the things that seem to come
pre-built into our hard wiring
um and maybe not
um historically accurate but given the
world that I live in
um
doing something working really hard is a
big part of
um I feel
there's just a subroutine in my brain
that wants me to earn things and when I
do that I feel good when I work hard in
the gym I feel good when I take a cold
shower I feel good when I
um you know do something difficult for
my wife I feel good about that and I
definitely enjoy that Loop and then well
let me let me look okay yeah please so
if I could find one word to summarize
like you what I think I heard you say
it's meaning
definitely yeah so so that's that's one
of those human expectations is meaning I
think
that's a need okay now how you find that
is a very individual thing
but let me ask you a very scary question
though because it it puzzles me
um
you identify meaning with hard work
well
I've seen this happen by the way not God
willing it won't but what if you had a
stroke tomorrow
or
some idiot plug into you and you were
bicycling and and and and you you became
quadriplegic now you couldn't work hard
anymore
I love that question I obsess about
things like that so I thought a lot
about that one in particular
um so I would give myself 30 days to
mourn whether I should or shouldn't uh I
would and I would be very I would allow
myself to wallow in the sense that it
was unfair and that now I have to change
um the things that I engage in that
bring me joy but then at the end of that
it it is what it is and so getting lost
in unfairness is not going to serve me
so then I would immediately turn my
attention to
finding a way to have meaning and
purpose I think that that nothing that
I've ever experienced in life leads me
to believe that I would ever feel
fulfilled without meaning and purpose
okay great so finding a way to tap into
that and then I have a sort of safety
valve which is my wife and I remind each
other of this all the time because we've
already had all the financial success at
this point to do something for the sake
of money would be so crazy so we
definitely don't do that and what we
remind each other of is you should love
your life like just from a joy
perspective and if you don't check in
with is this joyful because if you're
working hard and it's joyful that makes
sense to me if you're working hard and
it's deteriorating your joy your sense
of self whatever then that's just
Madness so for even for our employees
what we say is look you're an adult I
want you to control when you need a day
off so you have an unlimited policy use
it as UC fit I do want people that are
hard workers don't get me wrong but I
know there are some times where on a
Tuesday I'm just like I'm I'm burning
out like this isn't Fun and so I stop
immediately because
I know what my priorities are in life
and joy is extraordinarily high and it
is certainly higher than success okay
well that's great
um that makes it easier for me to answer
your question
um
in terms of my new star
Joy is something that
um for me is an ongoing project you know
and I really do think that goes back to
the lack of play that I received in the
first year or two of my life you know
on the conditions of wartime and
genocide there's just not a lot of
cheerful play that happens with the baby
um
but what really likes my fire is truth
I just want to know the truth whatever
that is
because you like knowing how the world
works
this is not because
you see a truth is its own value
I
I mean I could give you all kinds of
good reasons why truth is a good thing
but ultimately
uh it's just a value in itself for its
own sake
and so I'm passionate about truth
um both internal truths and external
truth and I'm passionate
then my work is to as much as I can
perceive truth and as much as I can
communicate my perceptions
that other people have access to truth
as well or that they or that their own
passion in truth is kindled uh in its
own right so that's
that's my
if you ask for a North star that's what
I would say for myself
it's really interesting not at all what
I thought you were going to say can I
interpret when I look at the books
you've written and I look at you know
your willingness to come and do a
podcast like this can I read that all as
an exploration of Truth or are these
sort of side tangents no purely that's
what it's about it just so happens that
as a medical doctor
somebody would dealt with depression and
ADHD myself
dealt with terminal illness and
palliative care dealt with addictions
deals with babies
um
my path to truth has been to my own
experience and through my medical
experiment my personal experience
what I've been through as a person when
I'm going through as a person and what I
saw experienced and learned as a
physician so the books Express all that
when it comes to physical illness or
addictions or
Child Development or whatever but the
lodestar is always the truth
and from that point of view
I never cared much who agrees with me
and who doesn't and
to what extent my colleagues value or
don't value it you know that's just as I
see it folks you know and uh
um
in this society and this is not a
personal event it's just a general
comment that
um
truth is not hard to come by not easy to
come by because
uh for all the
knowledge that's out there and for all
the expertise
um
it's also split and it's also
disintegrated
so people have a hard time seeing the
overall reality of things and so my
attempt always is to
look at the context and look at the
overall reality so not just
how do you how do you change a kid's
Behavior but
why is the kid be having that behaving
that way and what is it in the
environment that the kid is reacting to
or somebody who's addicted
not just why are they using a substance
or why they are obsessive pornography or
gambling but what is that doing for them
what is that giving them that they need
what peace of mind what temporary relief
what numbing of painful emotions and
what did those painful emotions come
from and what happened to them what's
the context thing which should happen so
that
everything leads back to everything else
and so I'm always looking for the larger
truth of things which
demands a broader look
not isolating everything but looking at
everything as as one which
scientifically and spiritually and
materially it is
I am obsessed with what is true so I
resonate with you there big time what I
don't understand and so I'm going to ask
you a follow-up question to see if I can
isolate
um what it is about the the nature of
Truth just in and of itself that is
Meaningful to you so I'm interested in
the truth for one reason and one reason
only if I'm really honest with myself
and that is it has so much utility
once you understand it's like it's like
physics to me because we understand
physics we can send things to the Moon
we can create satellites you know better
manufacturing whatever
um
would the truth be as meaningful to you
if you were trapped on a desert island
with access to all the information in
the world but you could never engage
with another human so you could
assimilate the truth you could learn
what it is synthesize it maybe even have
insights that other people are missing
and and know to the core of your being
that you have uncovered something that
is true would that be meaningful or is
part of what makes it matter to you that
you can put it back out into the world
and that ultimately somebody can use it
well so first of all
that's not confuse truth with
information
uh interesting so help me understand
what I'm missing
well there's lots of facts out there
but truth is much larger than facts it's
it's integrating the facts
in a in a in a picture of of reality
so that and I I'm maybe putting very
clumsy language on what may be a far
more beautiful sentiment
um so when I when I hear you say that
and I take it in totality of how all
these things come together I come back
to this idea of the truth is that is the
way the world works so don't ask about
the the addiction ask about what caused
the pain like that makes sense to me
because now you can actually address it
and heal but what makes that capital T
truth interesting is the healing for me
but that's why but why do you want
people to heal
um because of my North Star so my North
Star which seems self-evident to me and
I'm always surprised that it isn't
everybody's North Star is that there is
uh the only thing that matters to me in
the way that I view the world is your
neurochemical state
and your neurochemistry
the only thing that's resilient because
Joy comes and goes suffering comes and
goes hopefully and the only thing that
gives you the resilience to even in the
middle of a painful moment a storm to
have emotional equilibrium is what I
call fulfillment so again meaning and
purpose derived from working hard for
something
um that you have developed a unique set
of skills so you really matter in that
situation and it it isn't only
alleviating your suffering it's helping
other people and that to me feels so
inherent to the human animal
that as a social species we're just
never going to be able to escape getting
psychologically punished for failing to
help others and we're never going to
escape getting rewarded for helping
others and I think that the more
uniquely we can do that so in a way that
matters to me right so you're not still
a high school teacher you're you're
expressing
helping others in in a very unique way
that I mean literally I've never come
across anybody that's got the unique
um conflagration of things that you have
so that makes your contributions all the
more individual and therefore I would
imagine precious to you so anyway
because of my North Star I want to
alleviate that Pain by having worked
hard to offer something to somebody that
they go whoa like this alleviated my
pain and now I can also go do something
that helps other people
um that's why the healing matters okay
so look so then to go back to your
desert island question
you know I mean metaphorically speaking
isolated in the forest didn't see
anybody you know
he
no I'm not talking with me I'm talking
about him the way I understand that
historical figure
he would have been perfectly okay being
on his own
because he attained
a sense of reality that was complete
and then he made a decision
out of compassion
to come back and teach others
and you are talking about compassion as
well you're talking about
not truth is utility you're talking
about truth as compassion so
it's not just useful because you can
build things with it the way you define
it
is you want to truth so you can
alleviate the suffering of others
and that's part of the truth
and
or Jesus said you know he is another
great
spiritual Avatar and teacher he says you
will know the truth and the truth will
liberate you
he didn't say the truth will liberate
you he said you will know the truth and
it will liberate you so when you know
the truth that's where freedom is
so truth goes Way Beyond facts
it was ultimately
as I understand that then as I've been
taught
has to do with Liberation and freedom
and it has to do with compassion
uh in exactly the way you talked about
it as well
So when you say tell me what truth is
well I'm telling you
it's got all these aspects
and it goes back to our conversation
what meaning
so that life without truth is not a
meaningful life
[Music]
that is uh that's very interesting as
you were talking I was like oh please
God let him write a book about truth I
would uh hearing you say all that I
would definitely sign up for that book I
want to talk about the idea of a
bodhisattva so this is one of the things
that I found
super interesting about Buddhism and
again hey a guy that understands it at
30 000 feet does not know the specifics
but
that idea of hey there's two things you
can do with Enlightenment you can hey
you're enlightened and and now you sort
of stand apart from everybody else or
you get enlightened and decide to be a
bodhisattva to re-engage to go back in
to help other people
and
do you think this is maybe a dangerous
question but do you think
any
body would like knowing what you know
about the human mind would anybody ever
that attained Enlightenment actually
just go peace I'm out
it seems like the very nature of that
moment would sort of propel you back to
other people
well first of all
the last thing I could I want to present
myself as is any kind of an expert on
what is I thought that might be your
response yeah you know
but yeah I mean there have been
in the Christian tradition there were
saints that went to the desert then they
just stayed there
and then certainly on the all the Hindu
Traditions there are all these people in
the Buddhist tradition as well I think
there are people who um
you know sit in caves and they just
contemplate reality and that's what they
do
um
which doesn't mean that what they do has
no impact on others
but they're not going out but they're
not out there trying to recruit others
or to teach others they're just doing
what they're doing
I
have extraordinary difficulty imagining
myself being one of those people
um which I'm not sure is either is an
advantage for me I mean I might be more
advanced if I could handle the idea of
being on my own
and and not doing anything
and just being
and just valuing being period
I imagine that for a person like me
might be a step forward
but I
but yeah I think from my limited
understanding they have people there
have been people who have done that and
they're part of the human Spectrum
aren't they
very well said
yeah but what at this point you're 77
yeah
you're so productive what is it that
keeps you going when most people are
like counting the days until they can
retire at 64 or whatever
um what what keeps you going
uh Botox steroid injections
um
well look I mean
you talked about meaning uh there's so
much meaning in my life I am I'm so
fortunate you know that that
and I've never stopped
developing not that I've arrived there
but I've never stopped developing like
I've never stopped being curious
um I believe I have a
I've finally come to accept that yeah I
do have a contribution to make and and
and and and and uh
and and that that has value in the world
and it is value for me so
uh at this point it's just
it keeps me going it's it's it's like
it's just who I am at this point
you know is is I'm curious about what
I'm doing I'm excited about
much of what I do I'm excited about
having conversations like this I'm
excited about the book I'm writing the
teaching that I do I'm excited about
spending time with my wife of 51 years
now I'm excited about
I can still go swimming and bicycling
and do the yoga and and just you know my
life is just a very blessed one at this
point not that I feel like that every
moment but since you ask it's not like
I'm you know what it is
when people talk about work
what is work I I think
um
if I remember right from physics
one way to look at work is energy
expended against resistance
and the more energy is
you expand against more resistance the
harder you have to work the more
fatiguing it is
but I'm fortunate enough that I'm free
enough in my life right now
that I don't have to face resistance
internal resistance
I want to do what I'm doing and
uh there's just so much more and and um
and I'm sure that my vision of reality
is still very limited and maybe there's
more to find out in fact I'm sure
there's more to find out so
it's just uh
it's just an expansion into old age I
think if if we're fortunate enough
we'll see how that goes and you know one
never knows what tonight will bring
later on the day after tomorrow might
bring but so far
it's an expansion
not physically
because as we get older physically I
don't swim as fast as I used to but
but there's an expansion
that's available to us mentally and
spiritually relationally
in terms of understanding
and that's
I don't know if that's
I don't know what that sounds like but
that's what keeps me going
how how do we expand spiritually and
that's probably a word that would
warrant definition but I'm curious how
you think about that
well
so
spirituality is really Beyond Who We Are
as bodies in his Minds
so it's an awareness
that
lies underneath all that and it can hold
all that but isn't identical with it
and this is where it's hard for me to
say am I saying anything
I truly know am I just repeating what
spiritual teachers that I've respected
and have learned from have mouth and I'm
just repeating what they told me
but it's both I think I I do have a
sense that there's more to us and that
more is
I think what we call spirituality and if
it's all kinds of shapes and forms and
I'm not concerned about that
but
I do know that
um
I am not who I used to think I was
and that nobody is who they think they
are
um they're they're beyond that
and I
that's the common teachings I think of
all spiritual traditions
which I'm very
inadequate and this is not false modesty
I'm just telling you uh
it's it's I mean adequate at translating
because
I haven't
had that deep experience
that other people have had
the truth is hitting your career goals
is not easy you have to be willing to go
the extra mile to stand out and do hard
things better than anybody else but
there are 10 steps I want to take you
through that will 100x your efficiency
so you can crush your goals and get back
more time into your day you'll not only
get control of your time you'll learn
how to use that momentum to take on your
next big goal to help you do this I've
created a list of the 10 most impactful
things that any High achiever needs to
dominate and you can download it for
free by clicking the link in today's
description alright my friend back to
today's episode
it's very interesting and I believe you
that you're not just being um falsely
humble but as somebody who
um works so much with
there's two two parts of your background
that
um probably lean into what I would
consider spiritual uh but I think we may
Define that slightly differently but
um one is the palliative care which I'm
extraordinarily fascinated by people
that do that
um and then your
I don't know if you would call yourself
a guide of
um
of hallucinogenic transformation I'm not
sure exactly what your involvement is
with that but I know that you've
um you've explored it enough to to sort
of have at least a sideways glance at
what's going on there
um
talk to me first about palliative care
I know that you sort of ended up there
by accident but
what makes that fascinating to me is
you've got subtracting out the pain
you've got somebody who's there
themselves but all of a sudden their
future is a known quantity and it's very
short and the profound change that that
makes in the human mind I find
interesting
um what did you learn about life about
yourself
um in your time in palliative care
well
the the people the nurses and the
Physicians and the um the social workers
and and the others who work in
palliative care
tend to be a very special breed
um in that they're not afraid of death
um
so learning not to be afraid of human
death
and giving up your sense of omnipotence
uh array liberating
by a sense of omnipotence I mean
Physicians are trained to save lives I'm
telling you Tom
I knew Physicians
that would barely visit their patients
in palliative care because they couldn't
stand
what they considered to be their own
failure which of course it wasn't
but the the their self-images healers or
physician curers
just couldn't withstand the white Heath
of death
and so that's very liberating when you
just
you get to talk to somebody and you get
to minister to them and you're not
pretending to be able to do anything
more than you can do
but you can really listen to people
and get to know people in their final
days and their final hours
final weeks
it's an absolute privilege
uh what what about it is a privilege
getting to know people without retention
you're not pretending to do anything you
can't do
in their past pretending
if they want to die right they pass
pretending that's interesting what do
you mean die right
well there's ways of dying you can you
can resist it
you can resent it
you can be angry about it
or you can uh
actually accept it
and allow
so much of what may be repressed in life
to finally arise for yourself
because before then you were too busy
and you were too intent on your role and
your personality and getting this done
and getting that done
you know
in one of my books and the body says no
I talk about this guy
who
who had a company
selling shark cartilage
as a treatment for cancer
that was a total shock
but he believed in it
and then he developed cancer himself
and he was admitted to the value of
carrying it and I was looking after him
and he was still eating he had terminal
cancer all of his body ate a week or two
left
he was still eating shark cartilage
which smelled awful you could
when you stepped off the elevator to the
pivot carefully you could smell the
shark cartilage
and I finally said to him
what is it smells kind of like the smell
what does it taste like does it tastes
awful I hate it
I said why are you eating it and I said
do you think it'll help your cancer he
said no I no longer believe that but my
business partner would be so
disappointed if I stopped eating it
and so
one of the last things I was able to do
for him is to say is to actually
convince him to help him see that look
you don't have to pretend anything
anymore
it's not your job whether or not your
business partner is disappointed
he had to literally
walk into the last week of his life
before he could let go of his role as
being responsible for other people
so that
coming towards death experience can be a
powerful teacher for people
and I've seen real love and real Beauty
and real inspiration from a lot of these
people so it's beautiful work and I I
know that everybody who
Works in palliative care will tell you
the same thing it's a real privilege
can you share some of the beauty
well I think I just did
just people being allowing themselves to
be touched to be helped
um
to be honest with themselves
to share stuff that they maybe never
told anybody else before in their lives
because they're too afraid to
um to accept
real lessons and acceptance
you talked earlier about how you might
use of a month to resent and so on you
know
so these people are very often past that
point
but that's a privilege to witness
knowing horizontal I can get when life
doesn't go my way you know
are there things that um
would it be a valuable exercise for
people to run the thought experiment of
you know look I might not make it to
tonight like you said let alone tomorrow
um do you think that there is uh insight
to be had from that or is there another
way for us to access
um
getting Beyond like if if you're
defining Beauty as
you don't have to pretend anymore you
don't have to play a role you can really
be who you are and maybe this dips into
Big T truth
um
how do we access that now without
needing to be truly facing a terminal
illness well again I don't know that I
am it's very easy for me to speak
from a present position as a healthy
active 77 year old and I know what I
like I know what it gets like when I get
a stop toe and how
life is unfair you know why did I don't
know I can't get on my elliptical
machine you know so again I'm in no
position to give you stage advice but I
can tell you two things one is I've
talked to a young fellow in his 30s he's
written a book called blessed with a
brain tumor
his name is Will pie and this guy's a
and I said well what's the blessing here
I interviewed him
he said well for one thing
when I'm interacting with somebody now I
value each moment
because I never know that this might be
the last time I ever speak to them
um and the Buddha again I'm talking like
some of the Buddhist which I'm not but
um he had his monks do a meditation
where they had to imagine themselves
dead
in the in in the graveyard and they had
to imagine themselves
being eaten by worms to the flesh melts
off their bones
it's a Rotting Flesh
and they need to imagine themselves as
bones just lying there disarticulated
bones and finally even the bones being
grown into dust you know
I can't say that I've attained any of
that I mean I'm just telling you there
are practices
there's a book on my shelf by Stephen
jenkinson who's another fascinating guy
it's called die wise
and he said you know it's basically
about you want to die well start
preparing it for it now
what's the wisdom if you remember from
the book
the wisdom is that I haven't read the
book yet my son just gave it to me um as
a birthday gift a few weeks ago so I'll
read it but I haven't read it again
that's really interesting
um yeah I for me it has been a very
useful thought experiment to remind
myself that for a long time I focused
entirely on um I want to live forever
and I was
um really trying to uh do all the things
that I thought would extend my life to
say 120 years believing that in that
period of time you know the science
would get better and we sort of hit
Health escape velocity where every year
that I lived there was you know a year
and a day added to our ability to cure
illness and that really served me for a
long time and it allowed me to make
long-range plans that other people not
might not be willing to make and really
made me feel excited and connected and
then there was something about probably
about a year ago that I started to have
this feeling that I would be better
served and more motivated by flipping it
and to start now thinking about how
transient my life is and that almost
certainly since none of us know what's
going to happen almost certainly I am
going to die and
I don't get a heaviness from that
um
quite the contrary there's something
about it that I find very motivating
that I do see the beauty that people so
often talk about that you know you have
this life for such a limited time and to
waste it playing a role to waste it
doing things that don't fill you with
joy to wasted chasing somebody else's
dream like it just doesn't make sense
and that that has been fun and I I
enjoyed both sides of the coin and I got
something very beautiful out of each and
it I didn't even like consciously
make the shift I just found myself more
and more sort of getting a bigger gust
of wind of of elevating wind if you will
uh from the side of thinking man this
really is like
how lucky how transy and how beautiful
in its sort of ephemeral nature how
wonderful it is
um and I think part of that part of what
was releasing in that for me is I am
very much driven to matter but never at
the cost of Joy right so it's like I
really want to matter I want to do
things that like are going to be felt
but I don't think about Legacy I don't
think about living beyond myself or
doing things that need to outlive me
um I just think about like hey what can
I do right now that will bring me more
fulfillment that will give me more joy
and yeah it was very
it was very fascinating to see that
transition happen where I went from the
only thing that gave me that push was
thinking of myself living forever and
then all of a sudden realizing no it's
actually now more advantageous to think
of sort of imminent death which trust me
I'm not in any way shape or form eager
for if we are imperfect and do you agree
with I think it was
um soldier knitson who said that the
evil runs through or the line between
good and evil runs through the heart of
every man
which Rings true to me does that ring
true to you I would say that the
potential
for both runs through every person
Hitler was a human being as I say this
in the book Jesus was a human being
at least let's agree that in his Earthly
manifestation whether you're a Christian
he was a human being
um even Jesus was tempted wasn't he you
know he was in the desert and he's
tempted by power and ego and acquisition
foreign
the Buddha
in the Buddha story he's tempted
by lust and by greed and by aggression
and
egotism
so yes the potential for for for that
kind of egotistical self-regard which
turns out to be evil at its ultimate
expression
is is that that strain is in us so is
the strain for compassion like the
Buddha infinite Love Like Jesus humility
like Moses that's all within us as well
the question is which conditions promote
which in his development the Buddhist
talks about seeds of which seeds in our
minds are planted in which you get
watered and which don't
so yes I agree that the potentials are
there
and in an embryo everything is there but
the question is what gets nourished and
what gets suppressed
and I'm saying that in this Society it's
the worst of us that gets nourished and
the best of us that gets suppressed all
right so let's define those what I would
assume that loving attachment
unconditionally loving attachment
certainly towards your children that's
part of the best of us yeah what are
some other attributes of the best and
then we'll move on to some of the worst
so let's talk about children and now
let's talk about people in general so
children's needs are
unconditional loving acceptance
from everyone or just their parents or
their parents or well ideally from the
community but certainly they're
nurturing caregivers whoever they are
and they're meant to me wasn't just a
parent by the way
we're never meant to be parented in
nuclear families okay it's pure that's a
modern thing so unconditional living
acceptance rest from having to work to
make the relationship work
say that again rest from having to work
to make the relationship work in other
words the child should not have to be
mold themselves into anything to make
the relationship work with their parents
they shouldn't have to work they
shouldn't have to be good nice pretty to
make the relationship work
they shouldn't have to take care of the
Parents emotional needs to make the
relationship work
like people that have to work to make
their to meet their parents emotional
needs end up in deep trouble as adults
very often physically ill you go into
tremendous detail in the book about that
so
children should be able to allow to feel
all their emotions
and I mentioned play before those are
the needs of the child
as human beings more generally we need a
sense of connection a sense of meaning a
sense of belonging a sense of
transcendence so that there's something
we're part of something greater than
just our legal egoic concerns these are
all the needs of human beings to the
extent that they're met we thrive
to the extent that they're not met we
shrivel
and there's lots of shriveled people in
positions of great power in this Society
no doubt okay so what are What are the
as we're creating this soil that we're
going to nurture things in yeah how do
things start to go awry and how do we
begin to prep the soil for something
better well we've covered that to some
degree so things will begin to override
when we lose contact with our pending
instincts and we'll and we is it just
that like is this would you
um
uh speaking from experience the book is
very broad but if you were going to
really like bring it down is this
largely an echo of a parenting system
that has become dysfunctional it's
it's a society that's become humanly
dysfunctional that transmits its
expectations through the parents
and that actually begins before birth
because already the the most stressed
and troubled the parents are
that has a physiological impact on the
child's brain development
so I'm just talking pure science here so
mothers who are stressed and depressed
they're infants in the womb were already
getting those messages hormonally and
through uh nerve conduction and so on so
that you can actually
um
monitor the heart rates of mothers who
are stressed and those heart rates will
be different than the heart rates of
infants whose mothers are not stressed
in the book you talk about the uh the
crazy ice storm
yeah it ends up showing up in the
epigenetic markers of kids if you don't
mind walk us through that it's pretty
crazy
well it's only that um
in in the laboratory they've shown that
the more you stress
um
parent animals the more troubled and
stressed the kids will be
so in Quebec there was an ice storm
some years ago and the and the parents
under when the mothers underwent great
stress
and
you know there was really cold there was
no heating a lot of stuff wasn't working
um
those mothers who experienced that
stress their children were shown to have
more troubles later on
behaviorally and learning wise and and
in other ways as well
so again the stress of the parent
translated into the physiology of the
child
there's a there's a study that I quoted
in the book about
they looked at
um
marriages that were
stressed and you could
there's two ways you could tell how
stressed the marriage was once you could
ask the parents
and they could they would talk about it
the other way is you could marry you
could measure the urinary thresh hormone
levels of their children
wow and the parental conflict was
reflected in elevated stress hormone
levels in the urine of the children now
elevated stress from our levels in the
urine means that the immune system
itself is under assault
and that has an implication for health
later on
we know for example that the more
stressed parents are the greater the
risk of asthma for their children
and that the degree of stress on the
parents is correlated with the amount of
medication the kid will need for their
asthma
amongst other studies lots of stuff
studies so in other words there's a
correlation between the emotional
environment that we grow up in and our
physiology
yeah I mean that's really the core
thrust of the book is hey all these
things that you think are maybe just old
age or
um bad diet they're actually related to
trauma or even disease in fact one of
the ones you talk about that was the
most eye-opening was ALS yeah which you
know I would think of as a genetic
disease bummer horrible roll of the dice
but walk people through the the um there
is a predictable personality trait of
people with ALS that I was like well so
um first of all there's nothing genetic
nobody else nobody's ever shown I mean
there might be some rare examples of ALS
genetically induced
tiny infinitely small minority
so genes don't have much to do with most
chronic illnesses there are some
illnesses that are genetic this is one
that runs in my family my mother and my
aunt had it muscular dystrophy
gradually they became weaker and weaker
already when I was a child my mother
couldn't lift her arm up
and in the end she was not immobile at
all
so if you get that Gene you're going to
get the disease
but those diseases are very very rare
about one in ten thousand most chronic
illnesses have very little or no genetic
basis to it
so for example there's a breast cancer
Gene but out of 100 women with breast
cancer only seven will have the gene
and out of 100 women with the gene not
all of them will get the cancer
so
in many cases even if these genes are
implicated it's the it's the interaction
of genes and environment
now in ALS is to you know the the ALS
personality which I noticed in
palliative care when I was a part of
care physician also in the literature
are people that repress their healthy
anger and emotionally very rigid and
they don't ask for help from anybody
um
and usually that's based on childhood
trauma
and Lou Gehrig was like that you Define
trauma in you you go to very careful
links in the book to make sure that
people understand trauma isn't always
getting hit with a bat or uh being
sexually abused like there's a range
that can be wildly impactful well let's
think
uh Lou Gehrig
after whom the name the disease is named
in North America
his father was an alcoholic and Lou
Gehrig was one of these really nice guys
that took care of his mother emotionally
he had to that's what happens in the
home of an alcoholic very often the
child becomes the caregiver
now he was such a nice guy
that you know he's the the the record
that he set for uh consecutive games
played
that stood for so many many decades
why did you set that record because even
if he was sick he would play because
he's too dutiful to his teammates to
take himself out of a game is that a
healthy thing or not it's not healthy
on the other hand
when I was a young rookie on the on the
Yankees who got sick and he couldn't
play and the manager was very upset with
this kid says what are you talking about
he's sick he can't play took the rookie
to his own home we lived with his mother
his mother put the kid to bed the rookie
nursed him and Luke slept on the couch
so that kind of self-sacrificing
self-negating emotionally repressed
really nice person is the person which
is typical of the illest personality and
there's been a whole lot of studies on
that that show that you know these are
the people that get ALS it's just that
the doctors don't make the link between
that personality pattern and the ls they
just basically swallowing your anger
swelling your Healthy anger direct yeah
sorry swallowing your Healthy anger is
directly causative
to ALS
I think it's a major contributor you
never see it
you never see it and you never see that
the anger in anybody with ALS and you
always see this
hyper conscientious hyper autonomous
self-sufficiency but no I don't need any
help
no
and when you talk to neurologists
which has been done in studies
they always describe their patients as
extraordinary nice ALS patients is
extraordinarily nice why they're so nice
because if they repress their healthy
aggression
which is that the neurologists don't
make the link between that and the
disease I'm saying that that plays a
major role because that repression of
emotions
again the emotions are not separable
from our physiology
the nervous system and the immune system
and hormone apparatus and the gut and
the Heart they're all one system
when something happens in one area
something happens in the other area as
well look the analogy in the book is
this
think of a person with a big beach ball
trying to push a beach ball under the
water
that takes a lot of effort
now
I've ever been angry
of course okay now when you're angry
it's not just an emotional state in your
head it's a whole body is no how much
energy would it take to suppress that
energy to suppress that anger can you
imagine so that you don't even feel it
but not feeling your anger was an
adaptation to your childhood where the
anger wasn't permitted
so that emotional physiological effort
of repressing anger takes a toll on the
nervous system and on the immune system
it's a major role in disease
I'm saying yeah it plays a major
contribution
yeah this is where the book really
starts to get into some fascinating
territory as you go through all these
different diseases and you start talking
about okay repressing anger you go into
the God is it the natural killer T cells
end up being suppressed because you're
putting so much energy away from your
immune system your immune system can't
keep up and so there's all kinds of
things like cancer that are afflicted
there was one thing where you said like
back in the 1800s or early 1900s there
was a doctor that was like oh whenever
you see somebody with heart disease they
have this type of personality and you
even talk about in the book the type C
you said it's not a personality type but
that there are traits yeah that people
with type c have that end up being sort
of pro disease personality traits yeah
what are some of those traits
well before I answer that let me go back
to something let's talk about a healthy
anger for a minute if you could okay
um
then I'll illustrate these traits okay
what is healthy anger
why are we given healthy anger so
there's a there's a system in our brain
for anger
not just for us
mammals
what is it there for
is there to protect our boundaries
samita invades of space
physically or in the case of human
beings emotionally used to say no stay
out
that's the role of healthy anger
now you first if I repressed that
healthy anger
what would happen to you to me in life
people would be just trespassing all
over me all the time
because I Had No Boundaries so healthy
anger is a bundle of defense is that
clear
okay healthy anger is a boundary defense
it just seems like one of its uses I'll
be honest I don't know that I'd say it's
its only use but I don't know if healthy
anger that's its only use that's his
major use just boundary protection
that's his major that's why it came
along animals have it you're in my space
how far are you extending that to loved
ones so now if you encroach upon a loved
one well if your loved one includes your
space emotionally no I mean if somebody
else is intruding on my loved ones oh
yeah that too yeah yeah oh yeah yeah you
or your loved ones anything you cherish
absolutely for sure
so that's healthy anger so the role of
anger is to set a boundary between
what's nourishing uh you know to to let
in The Lord of healthy anger is to keep
up what's dangerous and unwelcome right
what's the role of the emotional system
in general
is to let in what's healthy and
nurturing
and to keep what was dangerous and
unwelcome is that fair enough seems good
what's the rule the immune system
exactly it's the same the role the
immune system is to keep up with
dangerous and toxic alone was nourishing
and healthy
the immune system and then and the
emotional system
are not separate systems
they're part and parcel of the same
apparatus they're Unified
when you suppress the emotions
you're also suppressing the immune
system when you say when you when you
when you don't know how to defend your
emotional boundaries that also
um weakens your immune boundaries
physiologically
it's that simple
or if you oppress the anger that anger
doesn't go away
it doesn't evaporate into the heavens it
turns against you in the form of
depression or self-loathing and so on
in the same way the immune system turns
against you and now you have autoimmune
disease and so the traits that were
identified with chronic illness most
chronic illness like cancers or immune
disease or emotional self-suppression
inability to experience healthy anger
desire to please others to fit in to be
acceptable to be nice
to be ignoring of your own needs these
are the traits that are over and over
and again identified in the literature
whether with multiple sclerosis or
rheumatoid arthritis or with cancer now
there's a not the real per these are not
the real person these are adaptive
traits in response to the childhood
environment but they take a heavy toll
or take another so-called illness and by
the way the case I'm making is that what
we call illness is actually response to
life so take a take depression
this so-called
biological disease of the brain
what does it mean to depress something
try to push it down to push it down what
gets pushed and what's got pushed on in
depression
well I can tell you I've been depressed
what gets pushed on depression is your
natural emotions everything is flat
nothing matters nothing has any meaning
and that starts with people pushing them
down that's that's the word that's what
the word means it means to push it down
it starts in childhood but people having
to push down their emotions why do they
have to push their emotions to fit in
with other people's expectations so and
I don't know the literature on this at
all so they're oftentimes then the
depression will just sort of creep in
slowly I always assumed it was tied to
something being stuck in
um a bad relationship a death in the
family loss of a job that there would be
some sort of triggering event well the
okay fair enough
if you're in a bad relationship the
healthy response is not depression but
to deal with the challenges the nerve in
the relationship either by work them out
or by leaving the relationship
depression is not necessary outcome
the response to the death of a closed
one of a close one is not depression
it's grief
grief is the healthy response we have a
system in our brain for grief by the way
so grief becomes depression when you're
not allowing yourself to grieve but you
don't know how to grief properly yeah
and you don't know how to give properly
because your emotions were suppressed as
a child
and uh so yeah we have uh
these healthy systems but they get their
activity gets deformed through our
natural expectations
okay so to stay with depression for a
minute so you're pushing all this stuff
down it starts in early childhood you're
trying to fit in you want unconditional
love you're not getting it so you have
this directive for attachment and so you
begin to oh I see what I can do if I if
I don't yell scream if I'm not
expressing frustration if I'm the
caretaker or whatever that situation
demands then all is well so now I've
learned this adaptive response to
suppress my emotions and over time it
begins to
numb me I would assume I have not been
depressed so but uh so you're beginning
to be numbed but now something it gets
starts to be very extreme and you
what I have heard depression explained
as is just like
the skies are permanently gray you will
never see Joy again and so what what is
breaking in that that like the beach
ball analogy I like right I'm pushing
something under the water but if I stop
pushing it will pop back up and so if
that thing or my emotions is when you're
treating depression let's say
non-pharmacologically is it the release
of the pressure on those emotions to let
them finally come up yeah so the so the
the difference between the pushing the
beach ball down is that I'm doing it
consciously and deliberately
but the repression of emotions that a
child engages in is not conscious is not
deliberate it's an automatic response
it's unconscious therefore the child
can't just that go like that
and then as you say it numbs and and
becomes overall a depression now the by
the way I'm not against pharmacological
treatment
I've taken antidepressants they have
helped me so I'm not here to Advocate
against them
I could talk about their misuse but in
principle sometimes they're helpful and
occasionally they're life-saving and
much of the time they're over prescribed
for way too long and we're not dealing
with the real issues because the
pharmacology deals with the symptom but
it doesn't deal with the underlying
problem so yes the healing of depression
and I talk you know the last
the the final part and the longest part
of the book really is unhealing is you
have to
reconnect to yourself so you can feel
your emotions that's the treatment of
depression talk to me about reconnecting
how do you reconnect what is that
process
oh
well first of all you recognize that
you're disconnected
and you notice how that disconnect shows
up
you know in so many areas of your life
uh in your on the job or in the uh in
your personal relationships for example
on your relationship to yourself so you
have to become aware and this is where
I talk about disease whether it's
physical or so-called mental
um as teacher
not that I recommend the illness is a
way of learning to anybody
that's not my I think that happens but
if it happens it can actually teach you
and you can ask yourself what have you
been pushing down and what are the
stories why do I push it down
Oh I pushed on emotions because I've
learned I have the belief that if I'm
angry I'm a bad person
well is that really true
is a personal experiences anger really a
bad person
um I learned that if I push down my
needs uh then people will love me
do I really do I really want to be loved
at the expense of disconnecting from
myself
as a child I had no choice
because I had to be loved or connected
with otherwise I wouldn't have survived
is it still like that
so basically it's a gradual sorry isn't
it like isn't in fact this is my
overarching question and somebody that
has helped so many people through
therapy you probably have the answer or
an Insight but as we become adults yeah
you don't have like other than your
parents should you be lucky enough that
they're still alive but
man out in the outside world people do
want you to act a certain way and if you
don't they're not going to be around you
like I'll just be honest if somebody's
throwing a tantrum as an adult I don't
have time for that but an adult doesn't
do a tantrum are you sure yeah like I
have seen adults throw when I don't have
an adult version you've seen you have
children in that old body just throw
Tantrums interesting okay go on you know
so the the adult who throws a tantrum
he's a traumatized child
who has not developed self-regulation
I'm not talking about repression of self
but regulation
so for example help me differentiate so
for example I throw up at the airline
counter and uh they've
overbooked the airplane okay
my healthy response is
disappointment and some degree of anger
I'd say this is not right that you did
this
I want you to redress it
you do something about it please
you're going to get the poor clerk
behind the counter who had nothing to do
with creating the problem who's just
trying to do her job and trying to help
me as best she can is that that's not a
mature adult
that's a child
whose Midfield cortex so self-regulation
has gone offline and his emotional
circuits have taken over believe me I've
been an adult child very often in my
life as my wife could tell me tell you
so uh that's not an adult
okay so then the process there goes back
to connect to yourself figure out why
you're repressing this yeah let go of
those things that are keeping it down
find a way to
be able to regulate yourself so that
they're sort of contextually
sensical so that we're not in unhealthy
anger territory
um
okay interesting so trauma is
um is an imprint that makes you react to
the present like you're still a child
essentially I mean that's a very narrow
definition of terminal that's one of his
essential aspects and that the important
thing that you said earlier is it's
automatic it's automatically it's
unwilled it's automatic and it's um and
actually when you look at the brand
scans of deeply traumatized people
the prefrontal cortex is totally asleep
and the emotional circuits you know
they're the the the the the Primitive
emotional responses are active
this is why
so many of so much of the jail
population are traumatized people that's
who end up in jail
but instead of dealing with the trauma
and helping them develop which they
could under the right circumstances
become adult people
self-regulated the jails just make it
worse by the way by the way they torment
people on the way they traumatize people
even further so when I talk about a
trauma in for society informed Society
what if we actually understood trauma
what if you just actually understood it
you have huge implications for medical
school for medical health delivery what
if when you went to the doctor
with your depression we weren't just
told you got this biological disease of
the brain here's a pill
but they actually said what happened to
you as a child
one of the people I quote in the book is
the Great
pediatrician psychiatrist neuroscientist
Bruce Perry who just wrote a book with
the Oprah the title of which is called
what happened to you now what's wrong
with you what happened to you what if we
asked that question
you know so that would change medical
treatment completely
in the prison system or in the legal
system we didn't just say what did you
do
but what happened to you
that made you do it now that wouldn't
mean that we allow or encourage
anti-social Behavior
but it would mean that we would actually
want to rehabilitate people
and to help them become who they could
be
you know that's a very different legal
concept
what if an education
it was kids developmental needs that
were put Paramount rather than their
performance
it's interesting how would you do that
functionally
what would School look like well I talk
about it a bit like schools in Finland
there's much more play there's much more
freedom and they have much better
results than we do
so that being in other words we honored
what are the right results to look at a
child who's curious who wants to learn
who's engaged
who's respectful of others
who is confident
um that would be the right results then
you don't have to worry about stuff
acknowledged on their throats why
because they want to learn
they want to learn and so you don't have
to punish them you don't have to reward
them
you just present them with the
opportunities to learn and they will
that's a natural human attribute
be killed that in this Society
as people we always think we're looking
at a reality and our view of it sees
reality the way it is but it's been a
spiritual teaching for eons that really
brother Buddha said it the the very
first statement in the collection of his
saying the dhamapada is that
our thoughts are in the lead and so so
whatever our thoughts tell us that's the
reality that we see so essentially with
our minds we create the world
now Johnny Cash on this song says it's
all in your mind
um one foot on Jacob's Ladder which is
The Stairway to Heaven which by the way
wasn't originated with Led Zeppelin The
Stairway to Heaven is actually from the
Bible uh where Jacob dreams that the
angels are going up to heaven
or one foot in the fire so the cash
thing is one uh one foot on the ladder
one foot in the fire it all goes down in
your mind so the the kind of thoughts
that and beliefs that we have
create the world that we live in and
that's what I get from that song now
what the song doesn't say is that before
with our minds we create the world the
world creates our minds
so this is where development comes in
that that given our early experiences we
create a view of the world and of
ourselves and of other people that then
governs how we are in the world and how
we feel about everything
but we will forget those early
experiences and those shaping influences
and there's a result we mistake our view
of the world for the world itself it all
goes done in your mind which is what
Johnny Sins
what's the what's the time period of
that profound shaping window of
development is it
um just a couple years in the beginning
is it till we're 15 till the brain stops
developing at 25 like what what does
that window look like
it begins in the Euros
um so already the stresses or the
experiences of the mother
um shape how the infant experiences the
world
um we know this so that we can talk
about it maybe later in detail if you
wish but there's lots of evidence now
that the child's brain is actually in
its development is significantly
influenced by the mother's emotional
states
so it goes back that far
and so getting into the
what I really want to understand is the
the foundation of of that so I've heard
you talk before about in Native
societies it was always understood that
if somebody was angry you would just
keep them away from a pregnant person
because you didn't want that anger
transferring but my question is why not
what what is it about
um intense emotions or negative emotions
what is it doing to the substructures of
the brain that then make that
disadvantageous as the child grows
well so there was a study done after 9
11.
UM women who suffered post-traumatic
stress disorder while they were pregnant
as a result of 9 11.
a year later their offspring still an
abnormal stress hormone levels
so fundamentally what happens is that
the brain's capacity to perceive stress
and to process it
gets impaired
so that means people are now more prone
to feel stressed when there's no real
threat
or there may be more prone not to
recognize a threat when it is there
so our whole perception of the world and
safety and our responses to stress the
physiological apparatus for handling
stress is affected in already by what
happens in the womb
so thinking about
um the gym for instance so you go to the
gym and you want a stressor you want a
certain level of difficulty in order to
in that case you're tearing the muscle
slightly and then as it heals it grows
back stronger yeah
is it that the brain reacts differently
to stress and that any amount of stress
is bad or is there a certain amount that
is
um useful and just were going too far
well this is where I think the language
becomes very important what we mean by
we use the word strength so if if you
mean by stress the challenge
life is full of challenges which will
get you adrenaline going and so on
that's a good thing
I don't know
when I talk about stress I talk about a
threat that the organism doesn't know
how to respond to
and it's too much
and so that
[Music]
um
the uh
the person who actually coined over
stress who was a fellow Hungarian
Canadian Hans celier uh he's the
one who coined the word in his present
usage
um he really meant pressure on an
organism that's too much for the
organism to handle so that's what I mean
by stress I don't I don't mean the
stress of a freely chosen challenge
such as going to the gym and working in
muscles hard and and going even beyond
what you could do before I don't mean
that that's not what I mean by stress I
mean by stress and and the
the biggest triggers for stress
according to the research are
loss of control
uncertainty lack of information and
conflict
so when you subject people to those
circumstances which in this Society
happens a lot
people are stressed often beyond their
capacity to deal with it now that
capacity is very much programmed by what
happened to us very early in life
and where does that so it begins in
utero where is the sort of closing of
that hyper malleability phase because
where where
one thing that really drives me is the
question of okay damage has been done
um you know like in your case where
you're born two months after or excuse
me two months before the Nazis invade
Hungary it's like not a lot to be done
about that that is what it is so now the
question becomes can we undo it uh is
there a window of hyper malleability
where the you could sort of reprogram
the infant or is it like almost like an
imprinting machine where it's like nope
you had this heavy amount of stress in
utero that's imprinted and no matter
what you do in the first three years is
never going to undo that
it is imprinted uh in many ways
biologically which we could talk about
the person is not even aware of
imprinted in how their genes are turned
on and off and printed on how their
chromosomes function in printing how
their stress their apparatus response to
the external environment
um
imprinted in their cells imprinted in
inflammation in their bodies and so on
and so on and the earlier it happens and
the more it happens and the more
temperamentally sensitive the child the
greater the effects
having said that
it's never not reversible it's never not
approachable now
fact is people can heal people can
rewire themselves people can
um
uh find a equilibrium but the more
happened earlier and the earlier it
happened the more difficult that work
becomes which brings me
to my
Epitaph that I've designed for my
gravestone you know what it's going to
say it's going to say it's going to say
it was a lot more work than I'd
anticipated you know
it is a fair assessment I'm it's ongoing
work like I'm 77. it's ongoing work and
you know
um when I don't take care of myself
emotionally when I don't do my yoga when
I don't get myself into the swimming
pool or on the exercise bike
um when I take on too much in my life
it gets activated so
yes it can be dealt with and it can be
healed and it can be uh regulated but it
takes Consciousness it takes awareness
given your perspective with having dealt
with a lot of people that have had
severe early traumas that have echoed
through their adult lives in the form of
addiction
um what is it
if it's identifiable what is it that
makes some people able to get in there
do the work harder you know than
expected though it is and other people
that get stuck
yeah
yeah well that's the important question
um first of all let me just say that
trauma shows up in multiple ways
addiction is only one
so-called mental illnesses depression
anxiety ADHD PTSD whatever others
um physical illnesses chronic physical
illness like uh cancer and autoimmune
disease very often reflect trauma and in
physiological ways which you can talk
about and I'm not just giving you a
personal opinion I'm talking about the
research shows so trauma has multiple
manifestations of which addiction is
only one now what makes the difference
uh I don't think this is one single
Factor but there are a number
uh first of all has there been anybody
along the way
that was empathetic and supportive to
you
if there was that could make it no
matter what happened that could make a
huge difference
um
earlier in your life the better but if
there was a teacher if there was a uncle
an aunt
anybody who maybe couldn't change your
situation but could
listen to you or just validate you or
speak to you empathetically
that can make a difference
um
social class
has a lot to do with it because
um
if you can afford to see a therapist and
talk to somebody
that puts you in an advantage
how much stress you continue to be under
in your life
that has a lot to do with it when people
are trying to just to survive it's hard
for them to consider transformation
so people are under economic pressure or
racially oppressed or or um
under
um economic threat
political conflict
these make it difficult for people
because people are just in survival mode
uh people that are highly sensitive
they're both in an advantage of the
disadvantage they're at a disadvantage
in that the more sensitive they are
the more it hurts when stuff happens
but also the most sensitive they are the
more likely they might have to have some
insight or awareness or some creative
Outlet so that can work both ways
I would say the biggest difference is
was there some empathetic
support in your life at any time and and
even if you talk to people who have been
addiction for a long time and say well
what made the difference
somebody talk to me like a human being
somebody didn't judge me they accepted
me
what what window does that open up for
them is it uh it begins to allow
themselves to stop judging themselves
and to develop self-awareness or is
there something else at play nice it's
the very first thing you said
um
anybody who's traumatized then like
Trump I mean a broad range of
experiences from abuse extreme things on
one hand too
this parents would do stress to pay
attention to you or to really see you
and deceive you
when children are not seen for who they
are or when they hurt
they can make two assumptions
one
there's something wrong with the world
and my parents are not capable
or they don't love me
what can I make the or they can make the
Assumption and that's why this is
happening
because I deserve to be loved and I
deserve to be treated well but these
people are incapable and they don't care
you can make that also I'm sure you can
make the Assumption I'm talking about
unconscious assumption
or if you make the Assumption there's
something wrong with me
those are the two choices
now it's much safer for the child to
assume that there's something wrong with
them
otherwise it's a little safer it's a lot
safer yeah why safer why is it safer
because what what's it like to live with
the danger as a four-year-old living in
a world where your parents
are dysfunctional and they are
perhaps hateful towards you how could
you endure that for one minute
so you have to make the opposite
assumption if this stuff is happening to
me it's because I deserve it something
wrong with me no go back to your
question
somebody comes along and and treats you
compassionately
oh
maybe I'm not that bad person
here's a person who's here's somebody
who's treating me like I was a
worthwhile human being
maybe I'm a worthwhile human being
so that compassionate
reflection that you get from this other
human being
subverts your image of yourself as
worthless
and that's what makes the big difference
cool so that points to something that is
really interesting maybe a little bit
scary
um So Lisa Feldman Barrett who you may
or may not know uh has really
interesting thoughts so I'm always
trying to figure out how much of who we
are as nature or how much of us is
nurture and she told me Tom look you're
you're asking the wrong question so the
reality is we have a nature that
requires nurture and as you talk about
this it and I'm I'm going to put words
in your mouth tell me if they're
accurate it sounds like you're saying
our minds are essentially co-created and
we are presenting ourselves and looking
for an Echo back of or a reflection back
of what people think about what they see
and we're using both of those things our
own sort of sense of who we are Plus
what's being reflected back to us to
figure out who we are so if something
negative is reflected back that's
actually going to shape my sense of self
and if something positive is reflected
back that's going to to shape my sense
of self now that to me begs a question
I'm so curious to know what you think
about this so my response to that is
cool I'm going to become totally
self-sufficient I'm going to get to the
point where I don't need somebody's
reflection back but I can feel the
danger in that it seems like a risky
game to say I'm gonna totally withdraw
I'm gonna do all the work internally I'm
going to make sure that I know who I am
that I don't need that reflection back
but knowing how important loving
relationships are and things like that I
can feel while there would be some
upside to totally knowing who you are
believing in yourself but you're also
Walling yourself off how do you
conceptualize handling that
well it's a question of who's doing it
and why
because you can do that Walling off in
two ways so the Buddha
is another story he goes through all
these teachers and he wants to get
enlightened and he goes through all
these very rigorous self-denying
aesthetic practices and he just doesn't
the truth doesn't come to me
and finally he goes up by himself and he
sits under a tree
by himself
and it just sits there and he meditates
and it contemplates
everything that arises in his mind
and then after a while he has his
Nirvana here's this um
Enlightenment experience
and then he's got a decision to make he
understands his own nature
he understands the nature of reality and
he really does
he's on the outstanding Minds in history
but that he's got a decision to make so
do I just
Revel in this
spiritual
Liberation that I have
worked so hard to attain
and no he decides he's going to go back
and teach other people because he wants
to be connected to humanity
he wants to Enlighten other people as
well
what can you articulate what his um sort
of breakthrough Enlightenment
realization was
well
um
it'll be presumptuous of me to do so
because I've not had that realization
myself I've only read about it or I've
seen other people talk about it
um I don't mind a regurgitation of what
other people have said I actually so I
know Buddhism at a 30 000 foot view so I
actually don't know other than life is
suffering
um I don't know what sort of the key
Revelations are yeah life is suffering
is
I mean his real teaching is that life
doesn't need to be suffering
but the way we set it up with our minds
it is suffering
so it really has to do with
goes back to the Johnny Cash song it all
goes down in your mind you disidentify
from your mind
and reality is much greater and much
deeper and much more Shaker than your
mind will ever tell you
that's interesting can you say that
another way even even I don't know if if
this is your own understanding of life
or
um a reflection of Buddhism but I'm
curious to know
if life is more profound than your mind
what are the elements that make it
profound is it Beauty Is It Love is it
what is it
the problem with the conversation tone
is that there's two minds talking about
the nature of reality and uh in that we
don't use the same words or no it's that
we're still in the mind
whereas
um my very modest understanding of the
spiritual teachings not just Buddhist
spiritual teaching but Sufi teachings
are
Jewish spiritual teaching Christian
spiritual teaching I'm talking about the
spiritual teachings not the religion
[Music]
um is that
there is Essence there's truth that goes
beyond what the Mind itself can uh
comprehend
so far we must have access to it in some
way even if only through pure experience
otherwise but that's the whole point it
is pure pure experience that
a great poet like a room you can write
about or Hafiz can write about
but
um
I cannot claim to have had that pure
experience so if I did I didn't
recognize it as such
can I give you one of the experiences
I've heard you talk about and I'll be
curious to know if if you were grazing
along the edges uh of something I
believe it was your first experience
with Ayahuasca you said that
um you were there and suddenly had this
Rush of just pure love and that you if I
remember right you started crying and
and you were just overwhelmed with the
sense of just just love and it's purest
form and in in that moment realize you
had closed yourself off to that
experience is when I think about people
talking about there being something more
profound
those are the only sort of moments that
I can relate to where I think that
feeling is so elevated
and wonderful that but that's the only
thing I've ever touched on in my own
life where
um that seems like what they can be
talking about uh does that is that
getting close
well it's it's heading in the right
direction
um
I think that real spiritual teachers
would say
that that way they experienced there
wasn't a Feeling
it feelings are like activities of our
nervous systems and they would say
there's something deeper than the
nervous system
so what experienced was a state
of of being
uh
manifesting in Love no matter love might
not be the only manifestation of it
might be courage Clarity
um compassion
um
Justice
um strength
will I know one spiritually just
specifically who talks about it in those
terms but these are not feelings
the feeling of love and the state of
Love are not necessarily the same thing
but yeah there's more to it than just
the mental experience there's the direct
the the mental thought
um or even the emotional resonance it's
it's more like a direct experience of
something and um
you know it's clear that what the Buddha
had was for one he wasn't the only one
uh was a direct experience
but to go back to your question about
isolation so there's a way of isolating
yourself
as a way of committing yourself to
re-enlightenment
which doesn't mean that you'll stay away
from other people for the rest of your
life
it just means that you're going to go
deep into yourself and not be
distracted by all that the world throws
at you then is another way of isolate
yourself which is a defensive one which
is the world is so awful and heck with
them all I don't need anybody
that will protect you from
some kinds of Earth
because if you withdraw from
relationships you'll never be betrayed
well that's true
on the other hand
that itself is a state of pain that
isolation itself is a state of pain so
when you talk about isolation it depends
who's doing it and where is it coming
from and and to go back to the original
question
and you mentioned um
nurture nature it's perfectly true that
we're born with certain expectations for
the world
I mean every creature is like our lungs
are an expectation for oxygen
if it wasn't for oxygen we wouldn't have
lungs
so we evolved in response to the
availability of oxygen
otherwise you would not have evolved the
way we did
there might be some kind of creatures
around it wouldn't be us
so our lungs are on expectation for for
for oxygen
in the same way our nervous systems are
an expectation for love
for nurturing
for being held
for being valued
for being enjoyed
that's what the infant is born with
those expectations
and whether we develop well or whether
we don't depends very much on
how fully those
expectations are met now we can survive
without them
my God many of us have
but survival and fully being alive and
fully living are not the same thing and
fully and survival adapting to things I
mean
you can adapt
the human beings are particularly good
at adapting to
a vast range of environments
but that doesn't mean that we thrive in
all those environments
so one of my arguments one of my points
about the culture that we're living in
now is that yeah we're surviving but
we're hardly thriving and we're not
thriving precisely because our
expectations I'm talking about a
built-in natural expectations I'm not
talking about
artificial expectations like expect to
be foreign
expect to be respected by everybody or I
expect to be
achieving this achieving that no I'm
talking about the natural expectations
of a human being
and the less those expectations are met
by the rearing environment in the early
years the more distorted it'll be become
because the more we have to adapt to
something less than what we need and and
in my view as I'm sure you're well aware
much much of disease physical mental
afflictions addictions and so on
they all arise out of the ways we had to
adapt to unnatural circumstances where
our
natural built-in expectations were
authorted
that's a really
um useful way to look at things I like
that a lot so I use different words to
kind of describe something maybe similar
if not identical which I call the
physics of Being Human so there are just
some things we have needs we have
compulsions we for instance there there
is going to be a voice in your head
talking to you there is I've never met
anybody that doesn't have a negative
voice in their head talking to them and
we have we're an active species right
but we're an active species that also
tries to conserve calories so you get
this weird sort of conflict and that
Insight that you just gave I find really
powerful when I think about early
development so this notion that our
brain comes with
um I like to think of it in a biological
way though I'm sure what I'm about to
describe will be inaccurate but that
there are essentially neurons in the
brain that are looking for that love the
validation being enjoyed there was
something about the way you said that
that really hit me
um and that our brain is going to it's
it comes like lungs expecting the air it
comes expecting that love that
validation that enjoyment and getting
all of that reflected back and you talk
a lot about a child being narcissistic
and so that's part of the physics of
Being Human it just is everyone is and
not in a negative way just it's all
about me that's where their brain is at
in their development and if we sort of
run the experiment of saying well that's
probably the most advantageous thing at
least from a historical context that you
so got that it was so prevalent that to
think
erroneously to think that a parent's
happiness means that you're good
is such a great way to establish
confidence and a sense of worth and you
know all these things that are going to
propel you forward
gabri you're really making me put things
together that I've never been able to
draw the lines between
um that is amazing I bet you say that to
all the guys yeah uh I say it to all the
good ones how about that
um but it's interesting especially when
you put it in context of your upcoming
book which of course I have not read
called the myth of normal and how sort
of broken our society is I've always
approached it from the the like hey this
Society is
is like any society in time where you
can have a path through it that is
pathological or like the Buddha you can
find a path that is beautiful and
profound and you take I think a more
aggressive approach of saying no no
there's something uniquely disruptive
about the era that we're living through
and sort of just walking through what
you were saying about the the X the
brain has expectations of love the way
that lungs have expectations of air and
there's something about the way that we
have structured society that is breaking
that and in Breaking that we're just
regulating the immune system and a whole
host of other things that is really
interesting
um walk me through then some of the
specifics that you've covered in
shattered and in some of your articles
and talks
how is modern society disregulating us
and what can we do to resolve some of
that well first of all it's very
interesting uh you said shattered I
don't have a book called Shadow but it's
called sorry sorry scattered I don't
know but what's interesting is how many
people may say it that way
that's interesting that's very what have
I just revealed Yeah well yeah and to me
it's always revealing something about
the person and their self-image
you know because I don't think anybody's
ever shattered
um scattered has to do with the
scattered mind the American the Canadian
title of scattered Minds it had to do
with ADHD and you know the the dispersal
of attention
[Music]
um
gosh you say so many things that I'm
going to engage with uh come on let me
let me jump back to what you said about
everybody's got this negative voice in
their heads yeah
yeah but that's not a given
it's just what happens in this Society
do you think there are societies where
that would not be present or at least
not ever present I think we have in this
Society is like that for a long long
long time
but
that has to do with what civilization
does to human beings
so I'm sure that voice has been there
since the beginning of civilization
but not necessarily in our Aboriginal
State as Hunter guy to the small band
people
now we might have a conscience
that keeps us in line
but that's not the same as a voice that
keeps telling you how bad you are how
worthless you are
I think that's particularly is a
that itself is a product of life
experience
what what exactly if you have a sense
causes that like what in Civilization
leads to that
kids not being valued and enjoyed and
played with for just who they are
kids having to live up to expectations
in order to meet the approval and
welcoming of their parents
well if that's the case they better
install a little voice in their heads
they'll keep them in line otherwise they
won't get loved
and there's not a conscious process
Nobody Does this oh I want to instill a
little voice in my head it's not hard
it's this this is It's a natural
adaptation to an unnatural situation
in this society and I'm not blaming fans
in this Society it's extraordinarily
difficult
for parents to give those conditions
of
what the American psychotherapist Carl
Rogers called unconditional positive
regard a regard that has no conditions
of worth attached to it I accept you
just for who you are the Way You Are
that's very difficult for parents to
deliver even with the best of Goodwill
because they never had themselves and
only that then there's so much stress so
you mentioned my book scattered which is
an ADHD and I was diagnosed with it you
know in my 50s and I never bought into
the idea that it was a genetic disease
and even less do I buy into it now
but to tuning out that scattered Minds
that I wrote about that itself was a
coping mechanism
so when this when when an infant is
under stress because the parents are
stressed as I was as a Jewish infant
under the Nazis uh there's a lot of
stress as you can imagine
for a whole year of my first year of
life and more than that
of course I tuned out
as a way of escaping from the unbearable
stress that my mother was under
because as an infant you just soak in
the stress of your parents
but this is happening when my brain was
developing
so that gets programmed into my brain as
an adaptation now
you don't need World War and you don't
need genocide to make an infant stressed
you just need parents for under economic
stress who've got relationship issues
who got unresolved childhood trauma who
are isolated themselves who are
struggling in their lives who have
depression or anxiety in their lives
and infants young children pick up on
that they make it about themselves it's
too much for them
some of them will tune out to deal with
it
the tuning audience program in their
brain because that's when the brain
develops under the impact of the
environment
and then five years later or ten years
later or in my case 55 years later
they're diagnosed with the so-called
inherited disease
which it wasn't it was an adaptation
and it began as an adaptation it becomes
a source of a disorder but that's my
whole point that these early adaptations
have their function
but then
they're only meant to be temporary but
since they become wired in
no they create problems later on
and that I think is a source of much of
illness in our society
let me ask what would be a worse or what
would be a better scenario depending on
how you want to answer it would You
Rather somebody be
um loved validated enjoyed held touched
up until the age of three but then after
that they're put into foster care with
all of the woes of foster care
or would you rather somebody have a very
disregulated initial three years
um
mother is giving the child up for
adoption which basically tells you that
the pregnancy was incredibly stressed
gives the child away it spends the first
three years in let's say an orphanage
but then gets adopted to a truly loving
family that wants them enjoys them
validates them hugs them and gives them
all those things which of those is the
more distressing circumstance
well I mean
I I find out a tough one time because
what you're setting up is um
through tragedies
and you're asking me to choose the least
strategy and um I don't know that I know
how to do that I do know I think my BIOS
would be
that if the child had everything for the
first three years
they'll probably have some inner
resilience to handle what kind of
happens later although it'd be still be
a terrible scenario that you outlined
that total dysregulation in the first
three years I think would be very hard
to overcome
um not impossible
but
you know it's when you think about it
the scenario of somebody getting all
that
in the first three years
and then ending up in a horrible
situation
totally unlikely I mean why would that
even happen
what is up my friend Tom bilyu here and
I have a big question to ask you how
would you rate your level of personal
discipline on a scale of one to ten if
your answer is anything less than a ten
I've got something cool for you and let
me tell you right now discipline by its
very nature means compelling yourself to
do difficult things that are stressful
boring which is what kills most people
or possibly scary or even painful now
here is the thing achieving huge goals
and stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring building your levels of personal
discipline is not easy but let me tell
you it pays off in fact I will tell you
you're never going to achieve anything
meaningful unless you develop discipline
right I've just released a class from
Impact Theory university called how to
build Ironclad discipline that teaches
you the process of building yourself up
in this area so that you can push
yourself to do the hard things that
greatness is going to require of you
right click the link on the screen
register for this class right now and
let's get to work I will see you inside
this Workshop from Impact Theory
University until then my friends be
legendary peace out
yeah but it can give you scenarios but
but if your question is designed to
um
look at the heart of
what is the most important developmental
period for sure it's the first three
years
from conception until the end of the
first three years not that it's over
them
but those that's the template that's the
template and if our society just
understood that
just give the kids three good years
and and and and do everything you can
get do everything you can as a society
as a community to support parents giving
those kids those first three years
whatever that takes
we would save so much disease so much
dysfunction so much crime
so much addiction so much political
Conflict for that matter
so that's the importance of that
question is is if we only my friend the
uh children's Troubadour or Rafi I mean
you probably remember rafik he he
created something called the child
honoring Society you know child honoring
project
and he just says well if this Society
honored children what would it look like
well guess what we'd pay attention to
the environment
we would
um make sure that parents have the right
support that children are treated well
that parents who need the help get it so
that they don't traumatize their
children
so that schools
um instead of focused on
turning up gears and and machines in the
form of human beings focused on
promoting healthy self-image and selfie
self-development and healthy brain
development what if that was the focus
of the schools
it wouldn't take it wouldn't be more
expensive than what we're doing now it
would be less expensive
so yeah those first three years are
crucial
there's a guy named Jeffrey Canada who
introduced me to a concept that I found
both intriguing and terrifying which
goes along was why I was asking that
question and he was looking at kids that
grew up in the inner cities and why they
end up doing poorly the rest of their
lives and kids that grew up in Middle
income families and why they end up
doing better and he said that he
believed it could be boiled down to the
number of words a child Hears by the age
of three and the ratio of positive to
negative and I thought oh my God is it
really that simple and he was basically
saying that you're it's it comes down to
the language centers of the brain
developing and if in that period where
those those parts of the brain are
actually being constructed if you know
that the construction is going to be
based on the environment and you give it
a paltry environment where there's very
little language to interact with then
you get an underdeveloped Language
Center of the brain which ends up
holding them back later working
communication becomes extraordinarily
important in today's environment yes and
I just thought one that's thrilling news
because anybody that encounters that
information when they're pregnant or
about to become pregnant can do
something with it and it will have
lifelong positive impact but it's
terrifying to think that you catch a kid
at age six and it's like
[Music]
you can do the work and for sure like
you were saying you can always like
there can be Improvement and I would
never want people to hear that and just
give up but whoa the road becomes a lot
harder to hoe
well I have to say I don't agree with
you what was the man's name Jeffrey
Canada okay well
good name I don't agree with um
I mean it's not that I disagree with
what he's saying but I think there's
there's a deeper layer there give it to
me because what develops first
see the language is the is the left side
of the brain okay now what actually
develops first if you look at it is the
right side of the brain which holds the
unconscious
and it's the advice that an unconscious
template
that's most important more important
than there's lots of people there with
beautiful language development
articulate they're called professors and
academics who are emotionally infants
um
and sometimes the left The Language
Center is in the left side of the brain
can become a refuge from a lack of
emotional grounding on the right side of
the brain
so no what actually matters is how those
infants are held how there's some to how
they played with
there's a great neuroscientist
unfortunately died untimely
a couple of years ago Jack tanks up his
name was and he distinguished a number
of brain systems that we share with
other animals
they include seeking so the exploration
of the environment they include lust
obviously which is sexuality necessary
Rage which is healthy anger to protect
your boundaries
um caring so that be careful infants and
others
these are brain systems
and what he calls grief and panic which
is what happens when we lose their
attention relationships so that there
should be grief there should be Panic
those are healthy
where when our attachment relations are
threatened and there was also play
and all animals play and infants start
playing peek-a-boo at two months long
before they have language
and play is much more important for the
development of the brain than languages
according to a whole lot of
developmentalists and so a sense so so
because it sets the um
your sense of yourself in the world
and so it's not that what
this man Canada says about language
isn't important
it's just that
first there has to be this
right brain emotionally grounded
template for all that
and even later on
it's not the language skills we have to
help people develop not that we don't we
do but we have to work on their sense of
themselves and and and essentially
rewire they
right-sided unconscious brain so in La
there's a very famous psychotherapist
psychologist called um Alan Shore who's
not working on what he calls right-sided
uh Psychotherapy or right brain
Psychotherapy with adults
we've got all kinds of language skills
but who don't have properly developed
unconscious because of what happened to
them early on in life let me quickly
read you a list
um there's a wonderful
um psychologist at Notre Dame called
darcia narves who by the way you might
want to talk to sometime and she studied
hunter-gatherer societies
um
which is how we evolved
that was a revolutionary Niche and for
millions of years and for hundreds of
thousands of years and even for until 15
000 years ago
everybody lived in North Society so
that's where we evolved and he says what
do these people provide to their infants
and she lists them soothing perinatal
experience
prompt responsiveness to the
intervention to the needs of the infant
none of this business about letting kids
cry it out
those kids have picked up as soon as
they whimper in fact the Navy even put
down
extensive touch and constant physical
presence including touch with movement
so the parents are always walking around
holding the kids the papoose on the back
of the parent
frequent infinite initiated
breastfeeding up four to two to five
years wow with the average winning age
at age four
now here in North America here in North
America we're lucky if women are able to
breastfeed their kids for two months
and about 25 of American women have to
go back to work after two weeks
but that's an insult to the infant
I'm not blaming the women it's the
economy it's the society
a community of multiple warm responsive
adult caregivers so the whole tribe is
there to hold you and to enjoy you
um creative free play in nature with
multi-age Playmates now how many kids in
our society get anything close to any of
that
then we wonder why do kids have so many
mental health issues and behavior
problems and so on and then we then we
focus on the behavior problems and we
try and correct the behaviors
instead of looking at well what is this
child
manifesting through that behavior
you know so I think we need a lot we
need to look a lot more at not the
cognitive developmental stuff but at the
emotional developmental
side of things so that granted
what your fan says about language is
very important
that not being granted
we're barking up the wrong tree
explain to people when you say the myth
of normal what do you mean and then
after that we'll get into what a toxic
culture is
I mean a number two things
we have this idea what that what is
normal
is also healthy and natural
and I'm saying that in this culture the
norm is neither healthy nor is it
natural in fact the norm I think is
making us sick
number one number two we talk about
illnesses and of body and mind as
abnormalities I'm saying that illness in
this Society given the conditions
is a normal response to an abnormal
circumstance
so that's what I mean by the myth of
normal okay so the obviously you go into
great detail about this in the book and
I remember at one point stopping and
taking the note like wait a second
basically everything that we think of
like you're saying is sort of a normal
result of Aging or oh this is you know
just some people have this kind of
response and it is what it is it's just
natural
um It's All Coming Back To trauma and
it's all coming back to Childhood trauma
and
um a specific idea that we'll get to in
a minute but I want to push a little bit
on that idea so what why is what we see
in terms of things that we would
categorize as mental health issues or
overly stressed lives or all of the
Myriad things that we think of
rheumatoid arthritis one of the examples
that you give
how is that an Adaptive response
well
the rumors of the threat is
is not a not an Adaptive response in
itself it's the outcome of an Adaptive
response so when you talk to people and
I've interviewed many or you look at the
research literature on who gets
rheumatoid arthritis it's people who are
super conscientious
they have what's called hypo autonomous
self-sufficiency in other words they
don't allow us for help they looked
after emotional needs of others rather
than carrying their own caring for their
own they tend to suppress their healthy
anger
and uh they really try to fit in and not
make waves and these people that's an
adaptation This Is How They adapt it to
their childhood they grew up in families
where they were not accepted seen for
they were they might have been
traumatized that adaptation was to make
themselves to suppress their authentic
emotions and to try and fit in with
other people's expectations and to meet
other people's needs that's the
adaptation but that adaptation was
tremendous stress on the person and that
stress causes the illness sort of things
that the illness is the outcome of an
adaptation okay so let's talk about that
adaptation so yeah I think a lot about
the human mind as having directives
there are things that we have been
hardwired to do over millions of years
of evolution through even you know sort
of the non-human part of our
evolutionary tree up through where we
are now and so these directives get
implanted and it seems like your thesis
is largely about the way that as a child
we go okay this is what our environment
is I don't don't have a secure
attachment style maybe my parents aren't
paying attention to me but what is the
directive is the directive to get along
is the directive to fit in like what is
the core directive that causes this to
become pathological the core directive
is twofold
one is we have to attach we have to be
long we have to connect
but the other Vector is that we have to
do so while maintaining our own autonomy
our own authenticity Auto means the self
so that means we have to be in touch
with our gut feelings and our emotions
and to be true to them
and so what we need is relationships
image can be true to ourselves that's a
directive
now as soon as the directive changes by
because of this is what we're wired for
for example authenticity being in touch
with the gut feeling out there in the
wild there's a hunter-gatherer how long
do you survive if you're not in touch
with your gut feelings so that's an
essential thing
but what if you grew up in a home where
are your honest emotions are not
accepted by your parents let's say your
parents have read Jordan Peterson's Book
12 rules for life where he actually says
that an angry child should be made to
sit by themselves till they come back to
normal
or that parents should be able to hit
their kids in order to get them to
comply
now if a child experiences healthy
normal anger of a two-year-old but the
message he gets that if you're angry you
will not be accepted by us
in fact you'll be excluded you'll be
given a time up it won't even be with
you
until you come back to quote unquote
normal
then the child will
adaptively repress their anger so as to
maintain their relationship with their
parents so they give up their
authenticity for the sake of the
attachment
bad giving of the attachment suppresses
not just the emotions but because the
emotions are physiologically connected
to immune system in fact they're part
and parcel of the same apparatus when
you suppress your emotions you're
suppressing your immune system as well
and of you asking why are we seeing a
rise of autoimmune disease in this
society which we are
and as globalization spreads we're
seeing more other immune disease around
the world is because people are more and
more having to suppress themselves to
fit in with the false expectations of a
society
so that's the link
all right I'm gonna see if I can hold
all this in my head because this is one
of the the most interesting core
elements of the book is this collision
between authenticity and attachment yes
used a incredible analogy
that really hit me hard and that's you
said the lung is not the response to an
expectation of oxygen the lung is the
expectation of oxygen like it it is the
manifestation of that yeah if there's no
if there was no oxygen we'd have no
lungs our lungs evolved as an
expectation for oxygen which makes total
sense to me yeah and if the and I'm
paraphrasing here but I think I'm pretty
close that the human is the expectation
of attachment absolutely so that we we
exist only in relation to having that
attachment well how long would a baby
survive without attachment it wouldn't
yeah so so the infant is an expectation
but not just for physical so that
physical attachment
but also for emotional attachment of a
nurturing and unconditional kind we're
an expectation for that
we're that's why we evolved as a species
the the baby gorilla is an expectation
to be loved nurtured held and fed and
protected by the mother gorilla
now have you ever seen the mother
gorilla who ignores their baby's cries
can you even imagine one have you seen a
mother cry a cat that ignores the the
little infant kittens meow infant is an
expectation for unconditional acceptance
we tell parents to ignore their babies
crying
veto parents to separate from their kids
if the kids behave in a way that they
don't like
we tell parents to deny children's
natural need to play out there in nature
so human beings are expect we evolved as
you say as hominins over the last couple
of million years and as a species the
human you know the homo sapiens we
evolved his expectations for certain
conditions the Lesser Society meets
those conditions the more toxic it
becomes to the developmental needs and
therefore Healthy Growth of the human
being
okay so let's walk through that so yeah
what do you do because you talk about
needing to set boundaries and you're you
mentioned look I'm a parent and at the
end of the day I do have to sub
boundaries so how do we set a boundary
without and and I'll quote I think it
was Plato or Aristotle that said this
the only impossible job is raising
children one of the reasons that I did
not have kids is because I my sister and
I were raised in the house the same
house by the same parents and we reacted
very differently to that but first of
all you're not brought up in the same
home by the same parents that's
interesting why why do you say that
because uh the the parent that the child
experiences is the parent the way they
show up for that particular child
your parents did not show up the same
way for a female Childers for a male
child even if they tried to they
couldn't have because their program
culturally not to
secondly you were different ages
you came along at different stages of
their parent relationship to one another
or their cell phone or their
relationship to themselves did not have
the same parents you did not grow up in
the same house
number one number two you might have
different sensibilities that is for sure
one of you may be temperamentally more
or less sensitive than the other so that
means even if your parents could have
been the same which they couldn't have
been but even if they could have been
the same for both of you you would have
experienced them differently
[Music]
okay so knowing that level of complexity
yeah
how how do you do this well like it it
seems so my mother disciplined me both
physically so I was spanked and well
this sort of interrupt on no please
this and then you is one way to put it
hit you is another way to put it yeah
you know so
uh which that word doesn't ring weird to
me but I know given your area of
expertise that it does for you and
that's what I'm trying to figure out so
how do we set a boundary with without
the child feeling that there are
conditions around the love because
reading that in your book The and again
I don't have kids so nobody needs to
panic but
um
unconditional love to me at an
intellectual level anyway doesn't seem
to break just because you're told to sit
on the stairs or be isolated well you
see the the love that the child
experiences
see I don't doubt that your mother loved
you
but the love that the child experiences
is not what the parent feels
it's what the child gets from the parent
no
if you're told that if you're angry you
need to be on your own what message are
you getting you're getting the message
that only under certain emotions are you
only when certain emotions are present
are you acceptable to the parent
the the shot the child will not
experience that as love but that
um so I will say this this is purely
anecdotal and it's just me and I don't
want to get lost in that yeah but
um I remember I even as a kid I would
say that my mom I sometimes get very
angry at my mom but I never doubt that
she loves me no I I am nor should you
doubt that she loved you because she
loved you
but that doesn't mean that you
experience the love is unconditional you
wouldn't have any idea you had nothing
to compare it to that's the only love
you'd ever known so how do you set a
boundary without breaking the sense so
that's the question of who's setting the
boundary you see let's say a parent with
uh no no but here's what I mean
with children who are naturally lovingly
connected to their parents
how you set a binder is you say don't do
that
with a parent that the child is not
totally unconditionally connected you
have to use more and more Force
so when you talk about setting
boundaries yes you can't let a kid I
live in Vancouver British Columbia it's
not Alaska but we get pretty cold there
it gets pretty cold in the wintertime a
one-year-old doesn't get a choice about
do I get to go outside naked into the
winter in Vancouver no choice it's not a
democracy no you don't go outside naked
but how I do that a child who's wanting
to attach to the parent warmly will
naturally follow the parents advice you
see
um your mother hit you Aboriginal people
hunt together people don't hit their
kids when when the Caucasians or the
Europeans the Christians arrived in
North America they were appalled at the
parenting practices of the natives
because they didn't hit their kids
and yet those kids were far more
confident
and the capable than the Caucasian kids
so that you can set boundaries through
just love through relationship through
example
it doesn't have to involve force and
certainly does not have to include
physical Force
is there so that is one of the things
that that doesn't ring true to me now I
haven't studied it so who knows so maybe
this is just because I've grown up in
the system where it's sort of broken
already from the jump but is there
anywhere where that experiment is being
run today where we could see that
because
kids seem impulsive and their brains
aren't developed and they just seem like
little messes that need things like like
for instance a kid that throws a tantrum
because you won't let them go outside
into the snow so why can't they throw a
tantra that's they're expressing their
anger no yeah let's say but but but what
were you saying before because I'm going
to go back to it just before we talked
about the Tantrum oh yeah kids are
impulsive
um
here's the thing
children want to belong to the parent
they want to connect to the parent
there's a natural
range of attachment behaviors that the
kid will go through under healthy
circumstances one of them first of all
it's they want to be physically near you
they want to be held by you
in fact Aboriginal people
carry their kids everywhere they go
that's what they do gorillas
spontaneously
number one number two the child wants to
emulate you they want to be like you
that's a natural attachment Drive
so if you show up as a loving nurturing
parental figure the parent the kid will
naturally want to
emulate you and and copy you number
three the child will want to be good for
you
without any coercion whatsoever
and uh again I'm telling you uh
Hunter gather groups have been studied
extensively
extensively for how they parent and
those even books are being written now
about trying to learn the lessons that
they teach about how to parent why
because we've lost our parenting
instincts you're talking like an adult
without parenting instincts
and that's not a criticism
I'm just saying that
when you're tweeted like the way you
tweeted
it's amazing I talk in the book about it
look let me just jump back a little bit
this is in the book I'm two weeks old
I'm still in the hospital with my mother
and she she writes her diary my poor
little son my heart breaks for you
because you've been crying for the last
hour and a half
to be fed
but I don't feed you because I promised
the doctor that will only feed you on
schedule
now what's happening to me
this woman loves me
my mother desperately loved me
I know that in so many ways but she's
not listening to her own parenting
instincts her heart is breaking but
she's letting me cry by myself because
she promised some stupid doctor that
she'd only feed me on schedule what
message I'm getting am I getting the
message that I'm being loved
or is it two week old I'm getting the
message that my needs don't matter
and they don't care about how I feel
which message am I getting
yes she totally loved me
but she wasn't listening to your own
parenting instincts
and that is traumatic for the child
and it's confusing
because she loves me yet she doesn't
even feed me when I'm hungry
well that's really confusing and it's
traumatizing
and we're telling this to parents all
the time in this society as a physician
I used to tell parents to behave that
way I regret that
but I did so what I'm talking about is a
culture that has lost contact with the
parenting instinct or
take the example of do you remember Dr
Spock is that yeah the data spark was
the world's painting expert for decades
and he talked about how you deal with
kids you put them to sleep you put them
to bed and you walk out quietly and you
close the door and you don't go back in
because you don't give in to the tyranny
of the infant
he said the tyranny of the infant the
infant has an attachment drive that says
I need to be held by mommy or daddy
the child is crying to express that
attachment need because physically
that's how they can attach is they can't
emotionally connect as a as a one month
old they can connect if you hold them if
they see you if they hear you
what message are you giving to the kid
when you don't pick them up when they're
crying
that their feelings don't matter but
they don't matter
that's the message you're giving you may
love them
but you're still giving them a very
negative message
and so that you may know on some level
that your parent loves you because they
feed you they hug you that whatever but
at the same time these people that love
you are deeply hurting you
that's traumatic
Aboriginal peoples don't do that kind of
stuff in under normal circumstances they
just don't do it
do they have a rite of passage moment
where so let me do it again sorry the
spanking business yep
there's been studies recently published
in the American Journal of the journal
the American Medical association's
Pediatrics publication the kids are
spent
experience as much trauma as kids are
more severely abused
that's what the findings are in the long
term
sorry to interrupt but no not at all uh
this topic is a incredibly meaningful
for anybody considering having kids
raising kids yeah
um and certainly even for me somebody
that doesn't have kids nor plan to have
kids it's it is the thesis of your book
is so big and so powerful that it what
it does though is it okay so I've grown
up in a culture this your hypothesis
I've grown up in a culture that is
fundamentally sick is stopping
um parent many many things the book is
way bigger than uh just parenting we
just happen to be on that right now but
um so it's created sort of parents that
are detached from their parental
instincts that's right and so they're
constantly making these mistakes but it
feels normal right so I grew up in it
too the the fish is the last one to
recognize what water is yeah
um and so I can't even see that there
could be another way of doing this right
but because of that when I look at this
I think
once you're in the cycle how do you
break out of it because a you can't be
an infant forever even you know gorillas
at some point like the child is distance
from the parents needs to be either they
break away themselves or they get pushed
away or their parents may die
also very possible yeah and in the
cultures that I have unintentionally
encountered rights of Passage rituals
because I'm interested in Rites of
Passage there's this moment but I don't
so the one I'll talk to specifically
because I remember it so vividly is in
um The Long Walk to Freedom Nelson
Mandela's book he talks about how I
think it was your 14th birthday you're
with the woman and your mother yeah and
then you are ceremoniously removed from
her physically like they come and grab
you and take you away at what age uh I
think it was 14. okay and they take you
away and then there is this they cover
you in mud and then you are actually I
think before you get covered in mud I'm
getting the order wrong here but anyway
they sit you down buck naked in front of
the whole tribe or they very sharp Rock
they cut your foreskin off and they make
you yell a warrior prayer yeah and then
they cover you in mud and then another
young woman comes in after some time
washes the mud off your body I mean it's
this whole thing and before reading your
work I was like that's so rad like this
rite of passage that's dope you're
taking the child away from the mother
is that is that a necessary moment or is
that all part of this like just sort of
crazy Detachment from what we should be
doing so I think it's a mix of both
um let's just step back a little bit
um Nature has a natural agenda for any
human being like when you plant an acorn
what's Nature's agenda for that Acorn
grow into a tree go out to be an oak
tree so nature is the same agenda for
human beings to go to be independent
self-mastered
Collective connected beings that's
Nature's agenda that's how we evolved
that means if you meet the right
developmental conditions that kid will
grow up to be an independent person not
because you push them away
but because that's Nature's agenda
because the parents are going to die at
some point or another so at some point
or another that infant has to be an
independent adult that's Nature's agenda
we don't have to make that happen that
happens spontaneously so long as the
conditions are right now if you plant
that Acorn and to drag around with no
irrigation and no sunlight ain't going
to be any oak tree
not because the acorn doesn't have that
capacity but because the conditions
weren't right same with human beings so
I'm saying if the conditions are right
that Independence will happen anyway now
it's true societies have developed
rituals of Passage so there's a Jewish
Bar Mitzvah ceremony which happens at
age 13.
you know
um there's a Vision Quest that that that
indigenous people will lead you know but
those ritual rights of passages or those
passages rights of Passage rituals are
conducted by adults
to welcome the child into the adult
community
in the original original environments
which is small band Hunter of groups
there wasn't circumcision
in fact I quote an expert on Aboriginal
indigenous or hunter-gatherer groups Dr
dunassee and Arvest of Notre Dame
University who says that circumcision
wasn't a part of that kind of practice
so that circumcision came along later
with with with more settled tribes and
Agriculture and so on so once you get
away from the hunter-gatherer
familiar we're getting more and more or
less on this natural
so what Mandela is describing then is a
combination
of a healthy rite of passage of we're
recognizing your adulthood now we're
honoring you welcoming you to the
community of adults
but there was also an element of
barbarism in it we're deliberately
hurting a child for which there's no
reason whatsoever whether it's a male
child or it's a female child and we know
to what degree
female children in some areas of the
world are hurt by the rituals of
circumcision the male children are heard
as well not to the same degree as the
females but those are already
post
hunter-gatherer
[Music]
additions
so yes
rite of passage beautiful why is it
necessary to hurt somebody
it's not
hiding in there and I'm so curious I'm
so glad that I get to ask you directly
hiding in there is a sounds like to me a
vision of humanity that is just loving
and wonderful and that our natural state
is
um
we would grow into the oak tree
that doesn't
that isn't my same base assumption but
you very much have an expertise that I
lack so does your worldview require that
belief about humans to be not purely
good but certainly default good no
nobody's default good we've always had
problems as humans because we're flawed
beings you know but it's a question
again of
um
what develops under what conditions
you know and uh the more our needs are
met the more like for example in this
Society they believe very much is that
we're competitive aggressive
even hostile selfish creatures
that's not almost that's not how
Humanity developed we could never have
developed this That's The Way We Were
we could only have developed if they
were nurturing and communal support and
connection
and so if you look at all kinds of
cultures that are so-called
um primitive
so-called primitive giving and receiving
and connection our values and people
gain wealth by giving not by gathering
and taking from others so wealth is
defined as a set of social connections
rather than a set of physical
possessions
in Canada on the Northwest Pacific
Northwest they used to have the plot
latch
and the Potlatch were denoted yeah yeah
so it's an event where
people gather
and they give gifts
which is how they gather wealth of
connections
that's a very different sense of wealth
than Gathering everything unto Myself by
taking it away from everybody else
one of the first thing that the
colonialists did
is they forbade their rituals and the
spiritual ways of the indigenous people
including the potlatch
because it's threatened
the calling list acquisitive ethic
so we went against
thousands of years of tradition
in order to force people into a cultural
mindset that suited the purpose of
colonialism that's what happened
right now at the age that I'm at it's
more useful it's more motivating to
realize that I'm going to die when I was
saying I'm not rushing towards that I if
I actually thought it would work I would
cryogenically freeze myself like I would
much prefer to live forever
um oh yes yeah yeah that that's not even
like a a question for me and that may be
mental illness I'm perfectly willing to
accept that but in terms of what
is motivating to me that for sure like
one of my great pains and this is one it
actually bothers me so much I can't
allow myself to think about it
um that I can't pursue all the things
that I'm passionate about because there
just isn't enough time
I know that one and that's like that's
one of those far more than stubbing my
toe would make me think life is unfair
that one does and it really messes with
my head and so I I just have to put it
out of my mind yeah but it only messes
with your head because you have a
certain belief I mean there's a there's
a belief underneath I totally get it
I mean I think a lot of us have
experienced that I certainly have
somebody once said every choice excludes
every time you make a choice you're
excluding something else
you know and that's absolutely true
the the question is what part of me or
you doesn't want to accept that why do
we have a problem with it
and there's some underlying
belief there that creates pain around it
it doesn't need to be painful it's going
to be just it's reality
you know but so if it hurts so if it
bothers us
there's some belief there I haven't
thought about it but now that you
mention it there's some belief there
that creates the the pain
it's just like why do I have to be
everything and do everything why
I am a limited
human being
I'll take a swag at it and let me know
what you think so
um part of what I do
um is so my company actually tells
stories so movies TV shows comic books
that whole thing and when we're
developing a project we need to figure
out what the style of that project let's
say it's a comic book we have to figure
out the style okay so you go and you
start you know looking at materials and
seeing it and you realize that there's a
hundred different ways you could go 200
different ways more and you'll respond
so intensely to seven of them and it is
very hard to know that I won't get to
spend a year in that style right that I
have to narrow it down to to just one
and it's interesting like what I always
tell entrepreneurs is what really trips
people up is you're standing in a room
with a thousand doors and your job is to
close 999 of them right to decide comes
from what the Latin to cut it's like to
your point about exclusion that there's
going back to the physics of Being Human
I don't know why and maybe it's a modern
society thing but humans have a hard
time
closing those doors they have a much
harder time of closing the other doors
than they have walking through one
because if I say hey you can walk
through that one you can come right back
then they'll walk through it but if I
say you have to pick one that you were
going to walk through forever that they
would just stand there paralyzed why
doesn't don't we have the same dilemma
when it comes to relationships as well
you know it's interesting when I was
saying that my wife popped into my mind
and I don't with relationships I have
not struggled with that
um I it was a part of the calculus of
whether or not to marry my wife that
I'll never sleep with another woman
again
um but it wasn't a hard part of the
calculus so I don't know if that's just
uh okay that sounds or what
sure that's great and
what about before you met your wife
well Cameron this is interesting and uh
any insight you have here will be
greatly welcomed
I understood very early on the utility
of
um commitment
so
I was very bad with women when I was
young extraordinarily bad and my mom
though gave me a piece of advice which
was mind-blowing to me and she said for
a woman
trust is required for an orgasm and I
thought what like that seems so strange
to me as a guy I was like let me tell
you that trust does not enter into my
mind when it comes to whether or not I
can have an orgasm and but I thought oh
that's really interesting and so then
sort of looking at women how they're
prized for their beauty
and committing to somebody which always
struck me as a good idea that the value
in a shared life like if you ever watch
this interview over again look at my
face when you say you've been married
for 51 years I was smiling ear to year
um because that's something that really
matters to me is sharing a life with my
wife for as long as humanly possible and
all the things that I have to give up
pale in comparison to what it means to
share a life with somebody like that
um so putting the okay women need trust
that's interesting their prized for
their beauty which means that it's going
to go away over time as their partner
wanting to give them that love and
security and and and to be seen and
desired which I think is something that
people long for in a romantic
relationship
I need my wife to know that I will
always find other women attractive
because it's just hardwired in me but
I so covet commitment and and being in a
bonded relationship with you that I want
you to know no matter what you're going
to turn into a bag of wrinkles God
willing we get to that stage you're old
I'm old we're not physically attractive
in the the typical you know cues of
beauty and fertility but I'm still going
to be into you because we've shared a
life so anyway that notion hit me very
early and so I've always I haven't
struggled with commitment I guess that
was a lot of words around that and I and
I have been a commitment phob you know
really what was the push well which has
to do with my own childhood history you
know is that
to commit something is to invite pain
and rejection
you know which goes back to being one
year old and being given to a stranger
by my mother to save my life and I
didn't see her for six weeks five or six
weeks
so to be to open your heart and to be
committed means to be hurt
you know I'm not making excuses I'm
saying that sort of worked for me I've
learned commitment so your mother gave
you beautiful advice but I've had to
learn that over time
the good news I can tell you Tom
is the beauty does not go away
the the
should you manage come to 51 years as
mine has
you'd be looking to your wife's eyes and
you'll be looking this you'll be seeing
the same beauty that you saw
the first day of matter
it's going to be amazing
so it's not like that
it's not like all those wrinkles and
stuff
they don't take away the beauty it's not
where the beauty comes from
and so the the that again is our
society's
um
travesty
when it comes to defining Beauty
[Music]
um
so I'm telling you I've got good news
for you
now I love that
um
I know you're uh very clear about the
things you consider yourself an expert
in and what you don't and I'm more than
happy to hear just your thoughts out
loud but I'm curious in 51 years of
marriage other than that that beauty
remains what are things that you've
learned it seems like your marriage is
better now than it was before based on
things I've heard you say before
um
what what advice you have for people
that are you know much earlier in a
relationship than you
um
it's that the managers
a wonderful opportunity
to learn
about yourself and about life if you're
willing to be curious
and um and that
it's not 50 50.
it's a hundred percent it's a hundred
percent
so you reach 100 responsible for how you
show up
every difficulty we've ever had
has been a powerful learning experience
and this is where the commitment of
truth comes in because that's one thing
we've shared
is that
it's not easy to give up
your point of view and your grievance
and your
stance but
it's a deep payoff and when you do that
so that
the marriage is just the most wonderful
school there is
for development
if you're willing to look at it like
that then if if you and if when you need
the help if you're going to get the help
to look at it that way
and so how do you open yourself up to
that is it soliciting feedback from your
partner about what they see and how you
are and helping you understand the truth
about yourself or is it something
totally different well there's a lot
there's certainly that that's a very
important part of it um
it's also which goes back a lot of my
work is that any deep pain that you're
experiencing
is you confusing the present moment for
the past
so that in the marriage you're gonna get
triggered but when you think of a
trigger it's a very small little thing
and
what's much more important is the
ammunition and the explosive that the
trigger sets off and guess what who's
carrying the ammunition the explosive
you are so you can focus on the trigger
she said this or he said that way they
didn't say that they didn't do that or
you can focus on oh
what's exploding inside me and only ever
been carrying this
so it takes that Curiosity in the
willingness to look at yourselves
speaking of trauma and how we're
carrying around that explosive charge
are there universals to Healing from
trauma
what do you mean universals
things that apply to everybody so
um I'm guessing a big part of it's going
to be self-awareness you need to become
self-aware but
when I think about adults trying to heal
from childhood trauma that strikes me as
a very difficult Road and I'm just
wondering
um
you know I I hope that it's a Hopeful
Road certainly from what I've
encountered with your work there's
definitely a lot of Hope and I'm just
curious you know for somebody watching
this who's who is just in the grips of
you know childhood traumas both sort of
known and unconscious
um what can they do to begin to heal
so
there's many healing paths but
my own approach can be summed up in two
words and it's also the title of a
course that I teach for therapists and
so on
um
and
those versions of it for the lay public
as well I'm not recommending my
particular work I'm talking about the
name compassionate inquiry
so if you can be curious the inquiry
part is the Curiosity part I reacted
that way oh
why did I react that way not why did I
react that way that's not compassionate
I reacted that way
I felt this pain
I felt overwhelmed
I felt hatred
I felt rage
I felt despair
huh what is that about
so you have to have that Curiosity
and you have to have the compassion
to look at yourself
not through that voice that tells you
that you're worthless
but to say
if I reacted that way there must be a
good reason for it
something in me
there's something happen to me that made
me react that way at some point
so to be so rather than putting oneself
down or thinking that if I have problems
it means I'm deficient
have the Curiosity to look into it and
the compassion to not to judge yourself
for it
and that both can be learned both the
Curiosity and the compassion can be
learned and any good therapist any any
person you work with whether they call
it compassion inquiry whether they call
it something else whatever they work
with those two attitudes will be
embedded in their approach
if they're going to be helpful to you
so companionship curiosity
I think is the key
and then are there tools so let's say
that somebody's doing the passionate
inquiry they really begin to understand
what happened to them in fact maybe this
is a better question so let's say that
you had had the upbringing that you had
all the things you went through in
Hungary in your infancy but no one ever
told you about it
what does somebody who they clearly are
suffering from some sort of trauma
um but they they don't know what it is
how can they process through that
oh
yeah uh that's not very difficult
because it shows up in the present
and I can easily I do that with people
all the time
so so they don't need the why they just
need to know that they are reacting that
way well it's not difficult to get them
to see
um that what they think is your reaction
to the present is actually a reaction to
the Past
this is without any recall because
there's all kinds of memory and the body
carries memory even if it doesn't carry
a recall and a lot of things that people
that have happened to people
happened before they had conscious
recall
so uh
uh in my work I don't find it difficult
to drill down to what is it that people
are carrying in the present you know and
it's just a simple exercise that I do
with people
um so that what I'm say but but to make
a long story short the past shows up in
the present all the time and that goes
back to Johnny Cash you're almost done
in your mind
you think you're reacting to something
now uh no you're not you know the uh
there's a wonderful
um
um Italian writer who survived with the
Holocaust called Primo Levy who's just
the most profound writer on the
Holocaust of them all and he
went through Auschwitz he survived
ended up committing suicide decades
later
um but he said uh I'm just
um looking for the precise code here on
my cell phone if I can find it I will
give it to you if you can bear with me
pre I mean the the setup here I'm more
than happy to wait okay I'm holding my
breath
Levy
okay here it is so he says
um
anguish is known to everyone even
children
and everyone knows that it is even blank
and undifferentiated
rarely does it carry a clearly written
label that also contains his motivation
in other words people are Beyond no
suffering but we don't always know what
it's about
he says in any label that it does carry
can be mendacious in other words we can
tell ourselves that we're suffering
because of this but it's not necessarily
true
he says one can believe this is the
heart of it one can believe or declare
oneself to be anguished for one reason
and be so for something totally
different
one can think that one is suffering at
facing the future and instead be
suffering because of one's past
one can think that one is suffering for
others out of pity out of compassion and
instead be suffering from one's own
reasons
and so on and so on and I just don't
find it that difficult
to speak to somebody
and show them
their present suffering is actually a
memory of fast suffering
so that you know so recall is helpful
and you know there's ways to get at it
sometimes if it's totally unaccessible
people do hypnosis sometimes
people do EMDR sometimes people do
what's the MDR I've heard you mentioned
that before but I don't know
I've movement desensitization
reprogramming it's a way of working with
conscious and unconscious memories
um the Psychedelic work that sometimes
I've seen people under the influences
like they like recall things
um that are not available to conscious
memory usually but none of that is
crucial
what is crucial is to make the
distinction
that what I'm experiencing now is a
Resonance of the past
we want a totally different outcome so
we're not going to be judging just based
on your math we're going to be looking
at inquisitiveness we're going to be
looking at how much that you want to
learn but you're dealing with large
groups people in all different kinds of
positions like how do we because the
their the punchline of your book is like
basically hey we're going to have to
overhaul a lot of this yeah I mean you
go very specifically into the ways in
which the culture is toxic you have to
read the book to get into it but it is
like in a nutshell is basically we're
sort of like this is a ground up restart
like there's a fundamental flaw we've
already talked about the sort of basic
basic first building block of how you
actually in fact we haven't because in
the book you talk about
like even before you get pregnant the
things that can create trauma in uh
fetus and it's carried on and look I I
will tell you dear audience that uh he
talks about the science and there really
is from what I've seen quite a bit of
science that can show I think it was up
to five generations you could see an
epigenetic marker of trauma and even the
father who's carrying that across the
sperm into the fertilized egg it has an
impact on how the DNA is wrapped and
expressed it's insane and that it goes
for five generations that's Madness and
you begin to realize how easy it is to
perpetuate this sort of Wheel of trauma
so knowing that there's probably two
things we should talk about because
right now if mothers are paying
attention they're freaking out about all
the mistakes that they made that have
now traumatized their children uh and so
you go into blame in the book I think
that's important to touch on and then go
into the importance of not blaming
exactly exactly so I want you to speak
to the the role of blame here
and then how do we begin to heal stroke
build a society that isn't sick well the
good news is that I wrote this book with
my eldest son
I mean and believe me I've had a lot of
guilt as a parent I felt a lot of guilt
for the way that I stressed and and
passed on my own trauma to my children
which I did
not because I wanted to I love them
I I have always said they would have
thrown myself into a fire for them but
there was a problem
they never needed me to throw myself
into a fire they just needed me to be at
home self-regulated
knowing how to take care of myself and
being knowing how to attune with their
needs now that is a traumatized
survivor of the genocide in Europe and
there's a workaholic doctor and as an
anxious husband
in a conflictual marriage
I wasn't able to do and that really did
hurt my kids
I say that at this point not with Guild
just to say that's what happened I know
I did my best that just happened to me
my best
but anyway what I'm saying is is that
um I wrote this book with my son and
even the writing was a process of
working out our issues
so the first thing though is that
these issues can always be worked out
that the the patterns can be reversed we
don't get to stay stuck in them
so that's the good news
as far as blame is concerned
um as you say traumas passed on
multi-generationally you know the Bible
says that the sins of the fathers will
be visited unto the third and fourth
Generations
they're not talking about the sins of
the fathers they're talking about the
promise of the parents where we passed
on to the
future generation it's true
but if that's true
um if I passed on Nitro to my kid my
trauma to my kids did I cause my own
trauma as a child
why would anybody be blamed the end of
who you end up blaming
Adam and Eve
you know you end up blaming some ape
living in a tree who was my ancestor at
some point I mean blame doesn't make any
sense it's also cruel and and and and
totally unhelpful so there's no blame in
fact it's it's about it's not about
blaming it's about understanding
but once we understand
now we can start to do things
differently
that's the whole point
it's not about blaming so we have to
break the cycle self-awareness get in
touch with ourselves now let's zoom out
a little bit so we know what to do on an
individual basis we have to stop the
repression let the emotions come up
mature into the adult that has the
ability to self-regulate that could be
there for the next Generation to raise a
child in a healthier way exactly at a
societal level how do we begin to think
about this and what are some highlights
of like the the things that you're like
yo this is really broken and causing a
lot of problems is it the Health Care
system is it the education system like
where do you think sort of the the real
big ones are well the healthcare system
and educational system
um in any given Society the dominant
institutions will reflect the interests
of the dominant groups in any society
so who are the dominant groups in this
Society here's what we know
I know I'm talking to somebody who's
made a lot of money okay so don't take
this personally but but uh
the dominant
groups in this Society are getting
wealthier and wealthier and wealthier
and the rest of society is getting more
and more uncertain and insecure
that's an untenable situation because
when you look at what stresses people
are a loss of control
uncertainty
conflict and lack of information
which are precisely the conditions that
most people are increasingly living with
there's less security there's lessons of
a positive future
there's more sense of loss of control
there's more sense that my little voice
I don't matter
even doing kovid when a lot of people
lost a lot of money and under terrific
economic stress the top stratum of
billionaires gained immensely
well that's a stressful situation for a
lot of people that stress translates
into physiological illness
that's just how it works that's the
first point
uncertainty loss of control conflict
lack of information that's a given
condition of globalized capitalism
because you never know when somebody a
zillion miles away is going to make a
decision that's going to change your
life completely over which you have no
control whatsoever
that's a designation well that's a
a recipe
for stress
okay number one number two
um
you look at
well there's a
chapter on social sociopathy or strategy
now
you look at corporations
major corporations
who make decisions to deliberately
concoct products that'll get people
hooked and addicted
I'm talking about the food companies
this has been documented
that they actually plan scientifically
which combination of salt sugar and fat
are going to get people addicted which
are going to excite The Addictive
circuits in the brain No Doubt
thereby killing millions of people
the tobacco companies I have to talk
about them at all about what they've
done the companies that have for decades
hired
phony scientists to deny climate change
thereby creating conditions of ill
health
and the engineering life itself
and these are respectable
well to do
pillars of society and philanthropists
on massive scale
um
the
pharmaceutical companies
who
sell opiates knowing
no I'm not against opius by the way it's
a palliative care doctor I love the
opiates not for myself but for the
patients I was looking after thank God
but to sell those products and telling
doctors that they're not addictive when
you when you know that they are
tens and hundreds of thousands of people
are dying of opioid overdoses
but that's sociopathy by any definition
and these are the people at the top
still an echo of childhood trauma or do
you think there's something else at play
well it's a company I I think the people
who do it they're the really
disconnected from themselves
they really are disconnected from
themselves
uh
and they're acting out their traumas in
some ways but it's also the nature of
this system these are the people that
this system raises to high levels of
power and Rewards
then there's the political system
now I'm not talking about political
policy here for a moment
but in the book in the in the in the
chapter on trauma and politics we looked
at two opposing candidates Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump now
Trump is a is one of the world's trauma
experts Bessel vanderkle said to me is a
poster boy for Photon the grandiosity
the denial of reality
the genuine inability to tell reality
from lies
the aggressiveness Trump said once that
um
that the world is a horrible place it's
doggy dog
even your friends want your wife they
want you money they want your house
and this is your friends
now
he wasn't making it up
that sense of the world being a horrible
Place reflected his childhood
under a tournament Tyrant of a father
who demeaned his kids horribly and the
mother who didn't protect them and one
of his brothers drank himself to death
and as we know his niece wrote a book
and when was the family really well and
the Trump and the trauma that Trump
endured and how it manifests in his
adult life
now I'm not criticizing the guy I'm not
blaming him I'm not even talking about
specific policies I'm talking about his
personality
no
that's Trump okay who is he running
against
so let me tell you this story
I you probably read it but let me tell
it to you and give me your opinion
a four-year-old girl runs into the house
to his mother she's upset because
neighborhoods are building neighborhood
children are bullying her
and the mother says there's no room for
cards in his house now you get out there
and deal with it
what's the message to that child
at four years old yeah
at four years old how would that be read
that you're on your own kid yeah you're
suck it up
and don't be vulnerable in this house
that story was told that Hillary
Clinton's nomination celebration at the
Democratic
Convention in 2016.
and it was told as an example of
wonderful parenting
that same election campaign when Hillary
developed pneumonia what did she do with
it
do you remember
nothing right she didn't tell anybody
she collapsed in the street
she sucked it up
and she put up of course with the
philandering of her
husband all those years blaming herself
for not meeting his needs
typical trauma response what I'm saying
is
that the American public had the choice
of being too traumatized people
they chose the more traumatized one
the more traumatized yeah yeah that's
that's the one that's the one they chose
there are all kinds of reasons for that
again I'm not talking about policy
foreign or domestic I'm talking about
personalities here these are the people
that we Elevate the public uh High
public level
and they carry that traumas with them
inevitably those traumas show up in
their politics
Okay so
Society healing making things better I
know that you consider yourself hopeful
as do I
I am worried we were talking about this
before we started recording there is my
audience is going to get tired of
hearing me say this but there is a
Chinese uh curse proverb in interesting
times correct yeah and I would say right
about now it's very interesting very
interesting times so how do we and I
think you've even said that it you know
there's going to be a period of
of deep unpleasantness but that long
term you're optimistic and walk me
through one is why are you optimistic I
am too but I'm just curious what drives
your optimism and then how do we make
sure we end up on the optimistic side
well look the first of all to speak
personally
um
the imprint on me of
being an infant
under clinicians of genocide and War and
the conditions of a mother who was
really stressed and
terrorized
in grief struck because her parents were
killed in Auschwitz
and then who gives me up to a total
stranger when I'm a year old to save my
life I remember that story yeah was that
this is a bad world that I'm on my own
that
um nothing's ever work out for me
and so even when I was successful as a
physician
and even as a writer and so on
my innate belief was I'm basically
screwed
no I don't feel that way anymore
so do you remember when that changed
like I'm trying to figure out when that
changed so what was the work that you
were doing because we have the the
thumbnail sketch yeah we understand we
have to stop repressing our emotions let
them get reattached to ourselves but
like
if it were that easy then everybody be
cured at the end of this podcast which
of course they won't be it's not that
easy no so in the work that you were
doing in yourself were there a string of
breakthroughs
there was stranger breakthroughs it
wasn't like one big Epiphany it was the
gradual work overtime do you remember
any of the the key moments
a lot of it happened in my relationship
I'm married to somebody who
in my first chapter I say that you know
my problem is that my wife understands
me you know and she does all too well
but she loved me anyway
so and and wanted to be in that
relationship
I had to grow up
because a certain point
she wasn't willing to live with the
child anymore
so we grew together
I would say that was the Basic Ground of
my development but getting therapy
learned to know my own patterns and
where they came from and learning to get
some agency over them was very important
for me
what I observed as a physician as a
clinician Is A Healer
was huge fonts of information for me and
learning because you start to understand
the patterns of human behavior yeah I
started to understand human beings
sometimes I took antidepressants
that helped temporarily by lifting the
cloud like
his fear more clearly in fact you know
again I'm not an advocate for the
massive and I think horrendously
overdone use of medications but I can
tell you that the first time I took
antidepressant after a few days I said
you mean people can feel like this
normally so when a cloud is lifted I
could see a bit more clearly now a lot
more clearly actually
um coming to terms with my ADHD and
understanding the patterns not as an
inherited disease but as an Adaptive
response really helped as well
um oh interesting so wait
I'm not surprised so everything comes
back to trauma so how is ADHD an
Adaptive response to a situation so
picture me okay as I was
that uh first year of my life
my father's enforced labor my mother
doesn't know if he's dead or alive her
parents are killed in oceans when I'm
five months of age she has to wear the
yellow badge as a Jew under the Nazis
that painting of that is going to be in
the book
um
uh she's terrorized she doesn't know if
she's going to survive if I'm going to
survive
how am I feeling
I can only imagine give me a few words
um afraid yeah
lost there's a pediatrician at saw me
and said he's never seen such fear in
anybody's eyes than in my own eyes lost
right all that hopeless stressed okay
very how do I cope with that
you push it down I dissociate I tune out
what is it add all about tuning out
really never thought of it well they did
the major trade of it it is tuning out
the kind of absent-mindedness and
unwilled tuning out as an infant what
else could I do
could I escape
could I change the situation
I tune out
when am I tuning out well my brain is
developing the Tunica gets programmed to
my brain
why are we seeing more and more kids
with ADHD these days because parents are
so stressed
and sensitive kids pick up on that
stress they don't know what to do with
it they do not as they're as small
children when their brains are
developing it's not a genetic disease
it's an Adaptive response the problem
with adaptive responses is they help you
at the time but later on they become
problems
in other words adaptive at one point
maladaptive at another point
again the problem is that they're not
conscious adaptations
I mean look if you it was if it was
raining in California but it's always
good in Los Angeles but let's go back to
Canada okay
it's um I'm up in the north of Canada
it's freezing you know 50 below whatever
that even means you know how do I adapt
I put on warm clothing
that helps me survive
but what if I still wore that warm
clothing in the winter time when it's
really hot that same adaptation would
not kill me
the problem with these childhood
adaptations now with the cold clothing I
could take it off
there was no cold anymore I can take off
the warm clothing these childhood
psychological adaptations they're not
conscious they're not well they're not
deliberate they're automatic
they're under the level of awareness
therefore I can't just drop them in fact
I even associate my survival with them
so I'm very reluctant to give them up
so something has to happen to wake me up
oh
this isn't working anymore
this is where a diagnosis like ADHD or
depression comes in this is where
illness comes in
it can be a wake-up call again I don't
recommend it or a relation or a bad
divorce
all of a sudden you realize
I met somebody who didn't understand me
why did I stay with them so long because
my parents never understood me so I
expect not to be understood but it
doesn't work for me anymore
so next time I marry
I'm gonna marry somebody who is a bit
more mature and you know I'm more
immature now
so what I'm saying is that these
adaptations they show up as problems
later on in life and then we can learn
from them
you know in the case of my marriage we
learn together
I'm curious in in a marriage so parents
should offer their kids unconditional
love yeah should a spouse offer their
other half unconditional love
yes but it shows up differently
so unconditional love doesn't mean that
I have to put up with it
doesn't mean that you know in in the
case of uh in the case of my wife when
I'm throwing a tantrum the healthy
response on her part is to say
if you're going to be like that
I don't want to be in the same room with
you but if you keep doing it I don't
even want to be in the same house with
you so what if she gets changes between
childhood and adulthood
because in childhood they don't do that
the dependency
the the the child depends on the parent
for very life itself and for healthy
development my wife is not responsible
for my healthy development
she's not my mother anymore
as a matter of fact the reason women get
so much autoimmune disease is they
suppress themselves
to take care of the stresses of their
men very often yeah you tell a story I
think it's in the book I've heard so
many interviews as well sometimes I get
confused what was in the book uh of a
woman who's diagnosed with breast cancer
and her husband whose first wife had
also died of breast cancer her first
thought was oh my God I hope I don't get
so sick that I can't take care of him
yeah it's in the book who immediately
she's the one that diagnosed with breast
cancer she's gonna have the chemotherapy
or a radiation or surgery or whatever
and her first thought is how will I look
after my husband's emotional needs
well that's culturally ingrained in
women
that's why they think it's just cultural
or is it also an echo of the need to be
nurturing to the child
it's true that the nurtures Instinct in
women is much more developed than in men
partly because they have more of the
hormone oxytocin which is a nurturing
hormone but partly because it's their
cultural role and if you take men and
look after children they become really
good mothers
so it's a question of what role are
people put in um
yeah so you know I forgot what we're
talking about right before that last
saying you were explaining the
difference between
um the dependencies of a child oh yeah
my life is not responsible to help me go
into a healthy adult
that's not a job
her job is to be responsible for the
Healthy Growth of our children
if she suppresses her needs and puts all
her energy in taking care of the
women have a decision to make in our
society my life did really in a sense uh
am I going to look after the little
babies and we're going to look after the
big baby
and the energy they put into looking
after the big baby is taken away from
the little babies and children suffer as
a result
so my wife is not responsible for my
maturation and my Healthy Growth
um she ex she has the right to expect
that I'm going to show up as an adult
okay when you're supposed to offer
unconditional love
and you're not getting what you need
from your significant other how do you
have people play that out is it is there
a point at which they say look I just I
can't offer you unconditional love I
need to separate from this or
you can say I love you I really want the
best for you but I can't be with this
I can't be with it
it's toxic for me
it's bad for our children
some point
that's a result in that way do are you
saying that we should have unconditional
love for everybody even though that
means we'll maintain boundaries we'll
have different kinds of relationships it
depends what we mean by unconditional
love and again it depends on the age of
the person and the the needs of that
person so
um
uh
having love for a person doesn't mean
that you're going to put up with
everything that they do but how you like
even with children as we said earlier we
have to draw our boundaries but the
question is how do we draw our
boundaries
and in what spirit and with what
intention
that's interesting that's so complicated
and makes me despair
because it's so hard but I think you're
right the spirit in which you make the
intention so for instance my wife and I
yeah I would never have said that I love
her unconditionally just because that
doesn't feel true in that I have
specifically given her conditions and
said um if you were unfaithful to me
that would be the end of the marriage
that would be the end of my marriage too
for sure so but the spirit in which I
make that is not meant to be a threat or
anything like that it's just Clarity
what you're actually saying is
honey my relationship with you is so
important
that I can't bear to share that with
somebody else on that intimate basis
because my capacity to be intimate with
you would really suffer if I had to
wonder
whether you're choosing somebody else
instead of me
that's a perfectly normal healthy
statement to make
to an adult partner
it's an expression of Love Actually
help me understand that how is that an
expression of love because you really
want her
you're helping them be successful you
want that you really want that person in
your life
you're saying I really want you in my
life fully
and
there's no room for that in that you can
have all kinds of friends and I hope
you're independent and you have a life
that's not all bonded with my own and I
want you to have your own activities and
find your own meaning and
have your own friends and have your own
activities but in terms of intimate
relationships
I can't handle sharing that with
somebody else that's an expression of
love
there's so much
depth and Nuance to the human mind to
The Human Experience do you all worry
that we as a society will not be that
here's my thesis we didn't intentionally
get it right a thousand years ago or ten
thousand years ago yeah it was just that
was the nature of what we had access to
that's right and to sort of co-opt Chris
Rock's statement you're only as faithful
as your options which I totally disagree
with but uh but culturally like when you
take it on mass it does feel like a lot
of the sort of sickness things are us
solving like these minor annoyances that
end up snowballing into becoming deep
problems like At first it's just like
hey we want to be able to control the
food supply so we don't starve to death
amazing then it's like well we can
already do that now I want to make sure
that the food that I'm storing tastes
good and it's like whoa well if I can do
that then I want to be able to sell it
and if I want to sell it I want to sell
more of it now that I want to sell more
of it I want to make sure that it tastes
really good and gets into that addictive
quality that you're talking about and
look not everybody does does it
obviously from a food perspective that
was the whole reason that my partners
and I got into food in the first place
was we wanted to make junk food good for
you and so using things so explain that
I didn't mean junk food good for you so
it's good for you it's not junk food
well so to your point this depends on
how we Define junk food so I'll Define
the way that we looked at it is things
that you grew up as like craving wanting
whether it was chips so we made protein
chips now the great thing about protein
chips is they naturally kill your hunger
so you're only going to eat so many of
them and then they stop being funny so
doing things like that but anyway I
don't want to get lost in that but so I
worry that
that this isn't a bell that can't be
unrung well but let's go back to what we
were talking about intention your
intention wasn't purely to make a profit
your intention was also to serve people
while making a profit that's a very
different intention than my my own than
my only purpose is to make a lot of
money and no matter what cost no matter
how many people get sick when people
develop diabetes become obese become
addicted to the stuff that's terrible
for them
that's the actual intention of many of
the major corporations
now that wasn't your intention so I'm
talking about intention but how do we
scale that that's my punchline how do we
scale it what do you mean by that so I
really I I have I could have retired and
never worked again but I really want to
help people like get to I wouldn't use
your language the word I always use is
is a growth mindset I want people to
have a growth mindset but I think
secretly we sort of have a very similar
aim which is we want people to thrive we
just happen to be each attacking a
different part so that's the attention
the intention is that people should
Thrive now how do we scale that
yeah so if we have a sick society which
I'm with you or a sick culture I'm with
you how do we how do we get a culture
like
I mean we're recording this as there is
a war going on on the borders of Europe
so yeah uh it does make me feel like
there's just a nature to humans and it
repeats
I think we can have to challenge who's
in control for one thing
at some point
we're gonna have to challenge that on
some level
this is not a book about we talked to do
we do touch upon politics and a trauma
that's
manifested in politics but I hope the
answer isn't politics I hope the answer
but but this book is not a political
Manifesto agreed you know
um
but I think people have to start
thinking about what I'm talking about on
a large scale rather than just how do I
make my life better how do I make
Society better in other words how can we
think with the mutual need as Our
intention
and Our commonalities intention rather
than just my personal uh you know
aggrandizement I think that shift is
going to have to happen for survival
number one
in terms of what you say about wars and
so on well in any War if you examine
them closely including this one they're
always conflicting interests and power
interests and so on I don't think I'd
want to get into the politics of this
War and what I think about it but it's
not just an expression of human nature
it's an expression of political systems
clashing with each other for very
selfish reasons
that's what I see happening and I see
that in just about everywhere you know
so
is it in our nature to be aggressive and
cruel certainly our potential to be that
way
but you know here's what I see
yesterday I was talking to a a a U.S
veteran a Navy SEAL
who who came back as many do with severe
post-traumatic stress disorder
and uh through a psychedelic experience
actually
he turned it around he was losing his
marriage he was there he was throwing
Coffee Plus through the window he was
terrifying his children
his wife no longer recognized him
and
then he had this experience and he
rediscovered his true nature which was
loving and and nurturing and so on and
now he's that way towards the world he
would never go back and do the things
again that he did then
you know so even during covet you say
human nature
well in the book I make this point the
Alfie corn was a education educator and
a writer he says when somebody be is
selfishly we say well that's just human
nature
pop-up must somebody behave generously
we never say oh that's just human nature
but it is
and and so
at least in the early days of covet the
more stressed we got the more
overwhelmed we got by the crisis the
more the divisions and the rancor showed
up in so many on both sides
but what did we see in the beginning we
saw a lot of people cooperating
collaborating being kind to each other
um being communal celebrating the
healthcare workers you know supporting
one another
that
that's in our potential as well
so why should we settle for the worst
versions of ourselves and I say that's
us
it isn't actually most people want peace
they don't want war
people usually have to be manipulated
into war
which they are very often
you know so
what's our nature
that's why I'm optimistic I think it's
in US
social media is it's an engine of Envy
it's making you continually aware of
what other people have and what you
don't have
look at my poor pitiful life well that
person who's they're only posting the
most positive things they're not showing
they're they're kind of unhappy their
misery of their daily life